Carbon offsets,
Last but not later
A framework for the environmental integrity of offsets
in the property sector.

July 2023

propertycouncil.com.au

Project no: 2022/01

Contents

Document title: Offsets for net zero – Framework
Document No.: PCA 2022/01
Client name: Property Council of Australia
Author: Bruce Precious
Six Capitals Consulting
ABN31660019338
5/25-27 Wongala Cr
Beecroft 2119
Telephone: 0418 430 586
www.sixcapitalsconsulting.com.au

Foreword

4

1 The role of offsets in net zero

3

2 Developing an offset strategy

4

3 Conducting offset due diligence

6

4 Maintaining offset quality

9

Appendix A: Offset due diligence checklist

10

Appendix B: Example natural capital balance sheet

14

Appendix C: Scope 3 relevance and offsetting

10

Document history and status

REVISION DATE

DESCRIPTION

DRAFT 0.5

SEPTEMBER 2022

Refocus on key outcomes

DRAFT 1

SEPTEMBER 2022

For Customer review

DRAFT 2

OCTOBER 2022

Incorporates first round consultation and second round consultation questions

FINAL

DECEMBER 2022

Incorporates feedback from consultation

Special thanks, for guidance, insights, analysis, and encouragement, to:
• Tim Wheeler – Property Council of Australia
• Francesca Muskovic – Property Council of Australia

• Climate Active
• Carbon Market Institute

• Cassandra Lau – Property Council of Australia – Intern
• Leon Massoud – Property Council of Australia – Intern
• Jorge Chapa – Green Building Council of Australia
• Property Council of Australia – Sustainability Roundtable
• NABERS
©Copyright 2022 Six Capitals Consulting. The concepts and information contained in this document are the property of Six Capitals Consulting. Limitation: This report has been prepared
on behalf of, and for the exclusive use of Six Capitals Consulting’s’ Client, and is subject to, and issued in accordance with, the provisions of the contract between Six Capitals Consulting
and the Client. Six Capitals Consulting accepts no liability or responsibility whatsoever for, or in respect of, any use of, or reliance upon, this report by any third party. This paper does not
provide financial advice, readers are encouraged to seek alternative advice when investing in emissions offsets.

Carbon offsets for net zero: A framework for the environmental integrity of offsets

2

Carbon offsets, Last but not later: A framework for the environmental integrity of offsets in the property sector.

1

Foreword

Foreword
Australian property companies are recognised as global leaders. Many are
targeting net zero emissions by 2030.

Low-upfront carbon, highly efficient, fossil-fuel free buildings fully powered
by renewables and offset with nature – that is our formula for delivering a
climate positive built environment.

Their commitment to ever more sustainable commercial buildings reflects
the urgency of avoiding the worst of global warming.

The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) report highlighted
the importance of carbon storage mechanisms, such as nature-based
solutions, for achieving the ambitious target of limiting global warming to
1.5°C. These approaches offer valuable means to mitigate carbon emissions
while delivering broader environmental and social benefits. But as many
have noted, the offset market is fraught with complexity, making it difficult
to navigate, and there are real questions about its effectiveness.

Our industry’s global leadership is built on a longstanding foundation
of verifiable mitigation efforts targeting deep energy efficiency, the
procurement and production of renewable electricity, and fuel switching
from fossil fuels. Our sector emits almost a quarter of Australia’s emissions
and must decarbonise for our economy to reach net zero.
During this period of transition, some emissions are more difficult to
abate than others. Where residual emissions exist, offsets can deliver
environmental benefits, as a compensatory measure, at the same time as
organisations work to eliminate their emissions.

Mike Zorbas

Offsets that satisfy the criteria of additionality and permanence provide an
economically sound approach to early carbon mitigation. The development
of these offset markets should be encouraged, particularly where cobenefits including biodiversity enhancement can be achieved.

Davina Rooney

As our understanding of this complex area grows, we must also recognise
that the perfect offset probably isn’t available, and may never be, so
the best path is to identify those offsets with the highest environmental
integrity. This offset framework takes a “last, but not later” approach where
offsets are applied last in the sequence of carbon mitigation but not delayed
because of the complexities in determining offset integrity.
The framework has been developed collaboratively with Property Council
members, technical experts and with the support of the Green Building
Council of Australia. The framework reflects the unique nature of Australian
property, energy and emissions markets and the environments in which they
operate.
Applying the framework principles will equip organisations to ensure reliable
carbon accounts are maintained. This reliability will underpin credible and
high integrity net zero claims.
The Property Council is privileged to work with our members who continue
to lead the global journey towards net zero.

This framework presents a robust process to evaluate and verify the
authenticity and effectiveness of carbon offsets, tailored to real estate
owners’ needs. It supports informed decision-making and maximises
the positive impact of carbon offset investments. Guided by the Oxford
Taxonomy of Carbon Offsets, the framework emphasises transparency,
additionality, and long-term climate benefits. By using high-integrity, highquality carbon removal offsets, particularly those that are nature-based, real
estate owners can combat climate change and create long-term value for
their properties and communities.

At the time of writing, markets for emissions offsets are in a state of flux
with considerable work being undertaken to develop offset mechanisms
that conform with Paris article 6 guidelines. Furthermore, the Australian
Government is currently considering the outcomes of an Independent
Review of Australian Carbon Credit Units.
Global initiatives such as the Integrity Council for the Voluntary Carbon
Market (ICVCM) combined with local programs of the Carbon Market
Institute’s Code of Conduct are providing frameworks that will enhance the
integrity of carbon markets and the environmental integrity of offsets.
ASIC and the ACCC have both provided guidance in relation to the risks
of greenwashing that should be consulted when developing corporate
statements on environmental outcomes.

We commend this framework to them and to our industry as a practical
toolkit that supports measurable progress.

As the carbon market continues to develop it will allow the most costeffective methods of ensuring environmental integrity of offsets to be
explored and to mature. The “first principles” approaches proposed in this
framework will evolve as regulations, contracts, and methods for creating
and monitoring offsets continue to evolve.

1
https://www.cleanenergyregulator.gov.au/
DocumentAssets/Pages/Information-Paperon-the-Offsets-Integrity-Standards.aspx

Until this market maturity is achieved, users of offsets can form their
own strategy to protect organisational reputation using the approaches
detailed in this framework.

https://www.accc.gov.au/media-release/
businesses-told-to-be-prepared-to-backup-their-environmental-claims
2

3
Low carbon Living CRC, Best Practice Policy
and Regulations for Low Carbon Outcomes in
the Built Environment, 2017

Carbon offsets, Last but not later: A framework for the environmental integrity of offsets in the property sector.

2

Carbon offsets, Last but not later: A framework for the environmental integrity of offsets in the property sector.

3

Carbon offsets
framework

This framework recommends four related strategies to ensure
environmental integrity of an offset program that delivers reliable and
durable emission removal, mitigates the risk of greenwash challenges and
avoids reputational damage.

Definitions &
acronyms

ACRONYMS

DEFINITIONS

ACCU

Australian carbon credit unit, 1 ACCU = 1 tonne CO2e

Carbon
neutral

Condition in which human caused residual emissions are
balanced by human-led removals over a specified period
and within specified boundaries (Note: typically applied
to a product or service level )

Emission
reduction

Quantified decrease in greenhouse gas emissions
specifically related to or arising from an activity between
two points in time or relative to a baseline*

The principles in this framework are designed to:

GHG

Greenhouse gases

•	provide a template for consistent and transparent communication of
net zero emissions strategies that:

Net zero

Net zero greenhouse gas emissions, condition in which
human caused residual emissions are balanced by
human-led removals over a specified period and within
specified boundaries*( Note: typically applied as a whole
of country, region, organisation, whole of portfolio target)

Offset

Emissions reduction or removal resulting from an
action outside the organisation’s boundaries used to
counterbalance the organisation’s residual emissions*

Removal

GHG removal, withdrawal of a greenhouse gas from the
atmosphere as a result of deliberate human activities*

Residual
emission

Greenhouse gas emissions that remain after taking all
possible actions to implement emissions reductions*

Four key components:
1. Demonstrate the role of offsets in a science aligned net zero plan
2. Document the offset strategy
3.	Show how a program of due diligence ensures offsets meet the quality
criteria in the offset strategy
4.	Maintain a Natural Capital Balance sheet; a register of offsets
maintained over time recording the results of ongoing stewardship
checks and measurements of stored carbon

o

outlines an organisation’s approach to procurement of offsets

o	allows business customers of commercial property to have
confidence in net zero emission certifications, making carbon
neutral a selection criterion when they are looking for space to lease
and accelerating progress toward a net zero economy, and
o

defends net zero claims against “greenwash” challenges.

•	enable companies to document and communicate an Offset Strategy
that:
o	articulates the company’s “houseview” of the features that make a
credible offset, aligned to this framework
o	promotes and preferences investment in nature-based GHG
removals and carbon storage
o	promotes use of offsets in the value chain only where elimination is
unavoidable and where efficient use of the offset can be made, and

*Marked definitions are extracts from “ISO Net Zero Guidelines IWA 42 2022-11”

o	encourages the cost of offsets be used in business cases to
influence lower emission outcomes (ie: similar to a shadow price on
carbon).
•	encourage well-functioning carbon markets with deep and liquid trade
in offsets that:
o	promote the development and deployment of the technologies,
techniques and equipment needed for emissions reductions and
sequestration by channeling investment to activities that might
otherwise not occur, and
o	encourages protection of offset supply for those sections of the
economy with the hardest to abate emissions.
•	provide a platform of advocacy to government to ensure policies and
regulations support the earliest adoption of net zero buildings.

Carbon offsets, Last but not later: A framework for the environmental integrity of offsets in the property sector.

4

Carbon offsets, Last but not later: A framework for the environmental integrity of offsets in the property sector.

5

The role of offsets
in net zero

In the commercial property sector greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions are
created through all phases of a building lifecycle with emissions produced
during manufacture of building products, during construction, throughout
operations and even during demolition.
Some of these emissions can be eliminated using strategies like energy
efficiency, electrification and refrigerant replacement, while others are
avoided by switching to renewable energy. Where residual emissions are
difficult to eliminate or require a transition period, the use of offsets may be
justified to bring forward the achievement of net zero or carbon neutrality.

Net zero and carbon neutral commitments are both integral
parts of the value creation strategy of leading organisations.
While net zero and carbon neutral sound like they might describe the same
thing, there is a distinction in practice where net zero targets are applied
at the portfolio or whole of organisation level offering investors, and other
stakeholders, information relevant to their assessments and decisions in
decarbonising their investment portfolios. Net zero targets can be aligned
with the World Green Building Council Advancing Net Zero program or with
the Science Based Targets Initiative.

1

Carbon offsets for net zero: A framework for the environmental integrity of offsets

Carbon neutral certification, applied at a building, product, or service level
is a key enabler in the decarbonisation of supply chains. Carbon neutral
tenants can demand and occupy carbon neutral buildings and in turn
owners of carbon neutral buildings can create demand for carbon neutral
building products and services.
Buildings make up part of the supply chain for many organisations, and
their selective preference for carbon neutral certification creates effective
market signals for the ongoing decarbonisation of the property sector.
Climate Active, administered by NABERS and the Green Building Council
of Australia for buildings, is a carbon neutral certification program with an
established “Buildings Standard”.

6

Carbon offsets for net zero: A framework for the environmental integrity of offsets

7

Offsets come last, but needn’t be delayed

In summary, an organisation’s net zero plan should include:

Building owners can typically act most rapidly to mitigate emissions under
their control, whereas influencing others up or down the value chain can
take more time. In an operational building the simplified chart below is an
example of the relative contributions of renewable electricity and offsets in
a portfolio of buildings that have targeted net zero by 2020.

•a
 ligning the net zero target with the latest international consensus on
climate science
•d
 ocumenting the relatively minor and declining role expected of
offsets to increase the credibility of the plan, and
• t he organisation’s advocacy position supporting early net zero targets
and urgent responses to climate change to enhance the credibility of
the net zero strategy and application of offsets.

Declining role of offsets in net zero operational emissions
Efficiency measures reduce
emissions year on year

80,000

Demonstrating that offsets are used in support of an emissions target that
is aligned with climate science is an important first step in establishing the
context for use of offsets.

70,000

In 2021 renewable
electricity is purchased for
the portfolio

What this means for the built environment is all emissions that can be
eliminated should be eliminated as quickly as possible. Any that cannot be,
residual emissions, must be addressed by solutions that remove GHG from
the atmosphere. Organisations that have joined Advancing Net Zero with
the World Green Building Council have committed to net zero programs
aligned with the science as described in the IPCC reports.

In 2021 start purchasing
offsets for gas emissions

40,000
30,000

Electrify all systems by
2030 and replace refrigerants,
no further offsets required

20,000
10,000
-

Electricity emissions  

2050

2030

2028

2029

2027

2025

2026

2022

Gas emissions  

2023

2021

2019

2020

2017

2018

2016

2015

2013

2014

2011

-10,000
2012

The report recommends strong, rapid, and sustained emissions reduction to
net zero by 2050. It also recognises that we must compensate for existing
and unabated emissions with nature-based carbon removal activities. In
fact, in all scenarios outlined in the report, capturing, and storing carbon, in
addition to deep and sustained cuts, is needed to achieve a 1.5°C trajectory.

50,000

2010

The latest IPCC report, Climate Change 2021 The Physical Science Basis
–6th Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
(IPCC), released August 2021, notes that we are currently at 1.1°C over preindustrial levels and that we are on-track to exceed 1.5°C in 10 to 12 years.
The report serves as a warning that action is urgently required and that
carbon removals are a necessary element of the solution.

Tonnes CO2e

60,000

2024

Aligning net zero
with climate science

Offsets

Figure 1 This simplified representation of operational scope 1 and 2 emissions from a portfolio
of buildings shows how offsets may only be required in the near term for a small proportion of
operational emissions. Demonstrating how offsets are used for a small proportion of baseline
emissions, for a limited time, makes net zero claims more credible.

The figure demonstrates that purchasing renewable electricity typically
has a much more significant impact on reducing emissions than other
fuel sources and that purchasing offsets can be a short-term measure to
mitigate emissions while gas systems are converted across to electrical
energy and refrigeration systems are converted to low/zero global warming
potential gases.

Leadership through action and advocacy
In communicating alignment with climate science, it is increasingly common
for stakeholders to ask about an organisation’s advocacy on climate change
and emissions. Descriptions of your net zero plan are enhanced with the
inclusion of advocacy positions taken individually or through membership
organisations.

Carbon offsets, Last but not later: A framework for the environmental integrity of offsets in the property sector.

8

Carbon offsets for net zero: A framework for the environmental integrity of offsets

9

Boundaries and
strategies

Net zero and carbon neutral plans have evolved to cover four different areas
of a property organisation’s emissions: corporation or portfolio, operational,
embodied, and organisational.
Net zero corporation/portfolio

GHG scopes
1, 2 and 3

In summary, offsets:
•m
 ay be used to mitigate scope 1 emissions in the short term, until they
can be eliminated
•a
 re not recommended to be used to mitigate scope 2 emissions.
This is reinforced by their lack of recognition in NABERS and Green
Star. Instead, install renewable electricity systems and/or procure
renewable electricity
•c
 an be used to mitigate scope 3 upstream emissions, accompanied by
supply chain action to eliminate emissions, and

Operational
Carbon neutral

Carbon neutral
Organisation

•c
 an be used to mitigate scope 3 downstream emissions where
support is provided to customers to either eliminate or offset their own
scope 1 emissions and move to renewable electricity, avoiding their
own scope 2 emissions.

New build - Carbon neutral
Embodied emissions

Figure 2 Boundaries between net zero and carbon neutral targets often overlap

Carbon neutral plans for operational property emissions typically rely on
contributions from six key strategies:
1.

A net zero goal requires that emissions are mitigated across all three
scopes of emissions:

Managing energy for optimal efficiency

2. Sourcing power from renewable electricity generated on or off-site
3. Transitioning fossil fuel systems to renewable electricity alternatives
4. Moving to zero global warming potential refrigerants
5. Eliminating waste to landfill, especially organics
6. Promoting elimination of emissions in value chains
7.	Purchasing and retiring carbon offsets to counter emissions that can’t be
immediately abated
Carbon neutral plans for embodied emissions rely on similar, but different,
strategies:
• Dematerialisation in design, reducing material use

Scope 3 emissions - value chain
emissions - are divided between
those emissions that occur
because of activities upstream in
the supply chain and downstream,
when customers or others use
buildings. The GHG Protocol
nominates 15 categories of
value chain emissions that may
be relevant to an organisation’s
emission inventory.

• Low carbon materials, focusing on materials with a low carbon footprint
• Encouraging construction material suppliers to measure and eliminate
carbon and consider offsetting in the meantime.

SCOPE

SOURCES

NET ZERO RESPONSE

SCOPE 1

Refrigerants

Elimination preferred, alternatively plans for
elimination are disclosed and offsets used as a
strategy to compensate for residual emissions in
the short term

Fossil fuel
combustion
on site
SCOPE 2

Electricity

Renewable electricity generated onsite and/
or purchased via the grid. Note that applying
offsets against electricity use does not result in
a credible net zero position and does not lead
to a sustainable outcome

SCOPE 3

Upstream value
chain (supply
chain

Elimination preferred, alternatively plans for
elimination are disclosed and offsets used to
mitigate residual emissions until the supply
chain is able to fully decarbonise.

• Adopting low/no carbon transport and construction energy

Procurement practice favors low carbon and
Climate Active suppliers or other international
carbon neutral schemes.

Carbon neutral plans for organisational emissions capture the emissions
of “head office”, emissions arising from electricity consumed by offices,
business travel and other supply chain goods and services.

-

A real estate corporation targeting net zero will typically include operational,
organisational and embodied emissions within the boundary. Key to any
net zero target is transparency of what is included within the commitment
boundary.
Some leading organisations recognise that the environmental impact of
carbon emissions is not a problem focused on annual flows, but one of
atmospheric carbon stocks accumulated over time. The lifetime corporate
emissions approach requires an estimate of emissions since an organisation’s
inception and is aligned with a “balance sheet” approach to managing
environmental impacts analogous to the “natural capital balance sheet”
introduced in section 4.
Carbon offsets, Last but not later: A framework for the environmental integrity of offsets in the property sector.

10

Downstream
value chain
(tenant/customer
emissions)

Elimination as tenants move all services to
renewable electricity with offsets used to
mitigate residual emissions in the short term

1
https://blog.google/outreach-initiatives/
sustainability/our-third-decade-climateaction-realizing-carbon-free-future/
2
https://blogs.microsoft.com/
blog/2020/01/16/microsoft-will-be-carbonnegative-by-2030/

Carbon offsets for net zero: A framework for the environmental integrity of offsets

11

Appendix C provides a summary
table including a sample scoring
of the seven relevance categories
proposed by the protocol to
determine if a category should
be included in an organisation’s
emissions inventory. Organisations
should conduct and disclose their
own relevance assessment for
scope 3 emissions
Table 1 The GHG Protocol defines 15
categories of scope 3 emissions that
contribute to the value chain emissions of an
organisation - this table includes upstream or
supply chain emissions

CATEGORY

APPROACH

USE OF OFFSETS

1 Purchased
goods and
services

Most relevant to developments,
goods and services incorporated into
new build. Through procurement,
express a preference for low carbon/
carbon neutral goods and services.
Segment expenditure and identify
low carbon options

Yes, neutralising
residual emissions
while transforming to
eliminate emissions

2 Capital
goods

3 Fuel and
energy
related

Appendix C provides a summary
table including a sample scoring
of the seven relevance categories
proposed by the protocol to
determine if a category should
be included in an organisation’s
emissions inventory. Organisations
should conduct and disclose their
own relevance assessment for
scope 3 emissions.

Most relevant to operational assets
purchasing buildings or assets for
buildings. Through procurement,
express a preference for low carbon/
carbon neutral capital equipment.
Nominate projects that will track
embodied carbon
Most relevant to operational assets.
Transmission and distribution losses,
linked with energy source information,
reduce through efficiency and
transition to renewable energy

4 Upstream
transportation
and
distribution

Most relevant to developments,
transition to electric transport.
Typically, low relevance to operational
assets.

5 Waste
generated in
operations

Most relevant to operational assets.
Waste management practices reduce
organics to landfill and increases
recycling resulting in lower emissions
from tenant generated waste

6 Business
travel

May be included in organisational
carbon accounts, limited to employee
travel for carbon neutral certification.
Low relevance to operational assets.

8 Upstream
leased
assets

May be included in organisational
carbon accounts for carbon neutral
certification. Low relevance to
operational assets.

Carbon offsets, Last but not later: A framework for the environmental integrity of offsets in the property sector.

Property development companies
that build homes/buildings for the
purpose of selling to future owners
may also find category 11- Use of
sold product, relevant.
In both categories, the property
company can ensure that tenants
and future owners have the ability
to use energy efficiently and use
renewable energy. The application
of offsets in these cases can mask
emissions and is unlikely to lead to a
sustainable market transformation.
The relevance assessment matrix is
a useful tool to explain the inclusion
or exclusion of the downstream
emission categories.

CATEGORY

APPROACH

In all cases, the application of
offsets can be best supported by
demonstrating how the cost of the
offset feeds into decision making in
relation to elimination of emissions.

12

USE OF OFFSETS

9 Downstream
Generally not applicable
transportation

NA

10 Processing
of sold
product

Generally not applicable

NA

11 Use of sold
products

Most relevant to developments,
encourages energy efficiency and
renewable energy systems be
installed early.

Yes, to neutralise
residual emissions while
transforming to eliminate
emissions and where
future emissions can be
reasonably estimated

12 End of life

Most relevant to developments.
Embodied carbon in demolition
materials is retained through
high grade recycling. Demolition
equipment moves to electric and
renewable electricity

Yes, to neutralise
residual emissions while
transforming to eliminate
emissions if end of
life emissions can be
reasonably estimated

13 Downstream
leased assets

Most relevant to operational assets.
Emissions associated with tenant
use of leased space. Collaboration
for energy efficiency and access to
renewable energy

Yes, to neutralise
residual emissions.
Renewable energy
certificates (LGCs)
are preferred for
mitigation of electricity
related emissions as a
sustainable solution.
For either offset or
REC approach there
should be a price
signal reflected back
to the consumer to
inform behaviours and
management of energy

14 Franchises

Generally not applicable

NA

15 Investments

Where investment is made in
operational property the preference is
to have an efficient asset powered by
renewable energy.

Yes, to neutralise
residual emissions
where the scope 1 & 2
emissions from these
assets have not been
mitigated

Table 2 Scope 3 downstream emissions
showing that the application of offsets for
these emissions require careful consideration

Most relevant to organisational
carbon accounts, reduced through
avoided business travel and choice
of travel mode. Low relevance to
operational assets

7 Employee
commuting

Table 2 details the categories of
downstream emissions, those
emissions that arise because of
use of an organisation’s product.
For the property sector the most
relevant downstream emissions
are downstream leased assets
(category 13) where emissions
arise from tenant activities such as
burning natural gas in retail kitchens
and using electricity to power office
tenancies.

Carbon offsets for net zero: A framework for the environmental integrity of offsets

13

Offsets in the
supply chain

Offsets in the
supply chain

In summary:
• include net zero or low carbon requirements in all supplier guidelines
and requests for proposal.
• request Environmental Product Disclosures (EPD’s) for products, which
allows for a fair comparison in procurement decision making and for a
more accurate scope 3 inventory
•d
 emonstrate how the net zero requirement is influential in the
purchasing decision, and

Tier one suppliers
As shown in Figure 3, tier one suppliers have scope 1 & 2 emissions,
their suppliers, tier two suppliers, have scope 1 & 2 emissions, and so on.
The goal of net zero procurement is to have every supplier, at every tier,
eliminate their scope 1 emissions and transition to renewable electricity
thereby avoiding scope 2 emissions. Successfully deploying this strategy
will ultimately avoid the use of offsets in relation to purchased goods and
services.
Following this thinking, offsets are applied most efficiently, and most
effectively, by the suppliers responsible for scope 1 emissions, however far
back in the tiers of the supply chain. Forcing decisions to abate emissions
up the supply chain allows those supplier businesses to transition across
to renewable energy and to make their own business case decisions for
eliminating or offsetting emissions. Using these market dynamics should
see emissions abated at the lowest overall cost.

•b
 ecome a carbon neutral organisation and encourage your suppliers
how to become carbon neutral suppliers.

Carbon emissions become embedded in supply chains as the many
organisations involved in the delivery of products and services rely
on activities that create their own scope 1 and scope 2 emissions. An
important point, scope 3 emissions are another organisation’s scope 1 and
scope 2 emissions.

In the meantime, all consumers can use their purchasing choice to
preference low emission, carbon neutral or zero emission products and
services thereby helping to drive the net zero market transformation.

Tier 2 supplier
Tier 1 supplier

Purchaser

Scope 2

•	product disclosures, such as Environmental Product Disclosures (EPDs)
showing carbon intensity of products

Scope 3

Scope 3

Scope 3

Scope 1

Scope 2

Scope 1

Scope 2

Scope 1

Information provided by suppliers should include:

•

Tier 3 supplier

•	Climate Active, carbon neutral certification with the Public Disclosure
Statement including:

Scope 3

Tier 2 supplier
Tier 1 supplier
Scope 1

Scope 2

Carbon neutral certified

Figure 3 Emissions in the supply chain accumulate from all tiers of suppliers. The least cost
transition to net zero requires each supplier to mitigate their own scope 1, 2 and 3 emissions
as shown by the carbon neutral tier 1 supplier

Carbon offsets, Last but not later: A framework for the environmental integrity of offsets in the property sector.

net zero target/status

14

-

Products/services covered

-

Proportion of renewable energy used

-

Proportion of offsets purchased

-

Type of offsets purchased

Giving Suppliers choice in the way they approach net zero allows them
to optimise energy efficiency + renewable energy + offsets as well as
influence their own supply chain pushing net zero deeper into the tiers of
the supply chain.

Carbon offsets, Last but not later: A framework for the environmental integrity of offsets in the property sector.

15

Developing an
offset strategy

In summary: creating an Offset Strategy helps stakeholders understand
the steps being applied to ensure the environmental integrity of offsets
and should include:
• the preference for the type and source of offset (reduction or removal)
• t he criteria set by the organisation to ensure the environmental
integrity of offsets (using the list in Appendix A as a guide)
•a
 ny portfolio approach that may include a variety of types of offsets
that from different sources and locations providing overall higher
reliability of carbon mitigation
•a
 ny approach to investment in emerging technology offsets to assist in
establishing a market
•a
 description of the approach to building a risk pool of offsets that
can be accumulated and applied if some offsets are compromised
(Noting that some offset methodologies already include the use of a
contingency amount), and
•e
 xpert opinion and guidance: suitably qualified offsets consultants
will hold an Australian Financial Services Licence (AFSL) and will have
committed to the Australian Carbon Industry Code of Conduct.3

2

Carbon offsets, Last but not later: A framework for the environmental integrity of offsets in the property sector.

Documenting and disclosing the offset strategy allows organisations to be
strategic in the procurement of offsets, diminishing the risk of purchasing
offsets with low integrity and enabling stakeholders to understand the
preference for particular offsets and the actions planned should any not
deliver the expected carbon removal.
Offset selection criteria can include the type of offsets preferred and the
risk strategies that will be applied to boost the integrity of offset claims.
For example, creating a portfolio of offsets, spread across different forms of
removal and across different geographic areas, different suppliers mitigates
risks of bushfire, reforestation failure, or organisational failure.
Similarly, creating a pool of reserve offsets is one way to ensure that there
are offsets available to top up if some offsets are demonstrated to under
deliver emission drawdown.
There are a wide variety of carbon offsets created through two primary
mechanisms: reducing carbon emissions or through carbon removal from
the atmosphere.

3
https://carbonmarketinstitute.org/code/
the-code/
4

16

ISO Net Zero Guidelines IWA 42:2022

Emission reduction offsets have been linked to energy efficiency projects,
avoided chemical emissions and renewable energy projects in the past but
it is increasingly difficult to demonstrate how these reduction projects meet
additionality, permanence and avoidance of double counting criteria. As an
example, renewable electricity generation is now among the most costeffective forms of generation available meaning it is very likely to happen
anyway in a functional market. (see Additionality)
The ISO Net Zero Guidelines requires that only removals offsets are used to
counterbalance residual emissions to achieve net zero.4

Carbon offsets, Last but not later: A framework for the environmental integrity of offsets in the property sector.

17

Offset creation
and certification

Offsets can be created under rules set by compliance bodies, such as the
Clean Energy Regulator in the case of ACCU’s or independent bodies that
certify voluntary offsets.

Types of offsets

Voluntary schemes recognised by Climate Active include:

The Oxford Taxonomy of carbon offsets clarifies the distinction between
offsets that are created through emissions reductions and those
resulting from carbon removals. Carbon removed, or drawn down from
the atmosphere, can be stored in biological material, trees and plants, or
geological materials and structures.

• Gold Standard: Verified Emission Reductions (VERs)
How is the offset generated?

• Verra: Verified Carbon Units (VCUs)
• Certified Emissions Reductions (CERs)

Emission
reduction

These organisations provide rules for the creation of offsets, methodologies
for measuring, verification, certificate issuance and a registry for tracking
offset certificates.

Carbon
removal

Is carbon stored?

Offset users can decide to either accept that the certification body
provides the level of certainty required of an offset or can make further
enquiries of their own to ensure they will be able to satisfy stakeholders
own requirements for fitness for purpose, reliability, and performance in
carbon abatement.

N

Y

Y

How is carbon stored?
II

I

Avoided emissions,
or emission reduction without storage

III

IV

V

Emission reduction
with short-lived
storage

Emission reduction
with long-lived
storage

Carbon removal with
short-lived storage

Carbon removal with
long-lived storage

Forward-looking,
counterfactual
baseline:

Clear retrospective
emission data:

- Avoided damage
to ecosystems

- CCS on industrial
facilities

- Afforestation &
reforestation

- DACCS

- Renewable energy

- N20 abatement
- Methane
abatement

- Changes to ag
practices that
retain alreadystored carbon

- CCS on fossil-fuel
power plant

- Soil carbon
enhancement

- Mineralisation

- Cleaner
cookstoves

Less permanent
Higher risk of reversal

- Ecosystem
restoration
More permanent
Lower risk of reversal

Less permanent
Higher risk of reversal

- BECCS
- Enhanced
weathering
More permanent
Lower risk of reversal

Figure 4 The Oxford Taxonomy of Carbon Offsets illustrates the various type of carbon
offsets emphasising the future role for carbon removal achieved through natural systems or
mechanical/chemical systems

Emission reductions offsets are often seen as being less reliable in relation
to offset quality criteria but there may be a case to include some reduction
offsets in a well-designed portfolio of offsets. Savanna burning projects are
a unique case of nature-based emissions reduction where early season,
cool fires release less methane and other GHG’s than late season, hot fires
(Figure 4, category I).
There are few (if any) geological removal offsets available at the time of
publication, so the focus of this framework is on nature-based (biological)
carbon removal (Figure 4, category IV) due to their high quality and
associated co-benefits to nature.

Correct at the time of writing, check for
up to date information at https://www.
climateactive.org.au/

5

Carbon offsets, Last but not later: A framework for the environmental integrity of offsets in the property sector.

18

Carbon offsets, Last but not later: A framework for the environmental integrity of offsets in the property sector.

19

Nature-based
offsets

Sources of
nature-based
offsets

Nature-based offsets
and Green Star
The most recent revision to
Green Star, which started in
2020, recognised the use of
offsets for the first time, in a
limited manner. Specifically,
the rating tool introduced
two credits: ‘Other carbon
emissions’ and ‘Nature
Stewardship’. The ‘Other
carbon emissions’ credit
supports procuring offsets
once all other outcomes
have been exhausted to
compensate for remaining
emissions. The ‘Nature
stewardship’ credit recognises
investments in offsite
biodiversity restoration.
Nature-based offsets achieve
both goals, providing an
opportunity to drive change
ay scale.

Nature-based carbon removal occurs through photosynthesis capturing
CO2 from the air and storing it in the biosphere, either above ground, as
vegetation, or below ground - bound into the roots and surrounding soil.

Quality of offsets

Nature-based offsets can provide significant environmental co-benefits
such as enhanced biodiversity, soil stabilization, and waterway protection
as well as social benefits through jobs in land management and support of
indigenous connection with land. Australia has significant opportunities to
restore and maintain natural environments that store carbon.

The environmental quality of an offset is critical in maintaining credibility
in an offset program and related net zero or carbon neutral claims. High
quality offsets will avoid reputational risks associated with “greenwash”
challenges. The integrity attributes described below draw heavily from the
10 core carbon principles of the ICVCM.8
All the traditional offset quality criteria apply to nature-based offsets and it’s
important to remember that there isn’t always a binary pass/fail assessment
available, the degree of, for example, additionality, is important and useful
for comparative purposes.
Nature-based offsets can be created under Australia’s Carbon Credits
Act 2011 using determinations and rules governed by the Clean Energy
Regulator. Australian Carbon Credit Units (ACCUs) are tracked in the
Australian National Registry of Emissions Units (ANREU).

Carbon emissions can be reduced or carbon can be removed from the
atmosphere through several nature-based approaches6:
• reforestation/human induced regeneration: allowing a forest to grow
on land that has previously been used for agricultural or other purposes
where natural growth has been suppressed [Figure 4, category IV]

As offset quality is not easily defined and sits on a continuum it is important
to identify to stakeholders the quality of offsets that are acceptable to
an organisation and, ideally, to have this as a topic of discussion with
stakeholders. They will eventually decide if the net zero claims (and offset
criteria) meet their own ambitions.

• avoided deforestation/avoided clearing: where land clearing is permitted
but has subsequently been avoided. This method should be considered
with some caution as it carries associated risk related to overclaiming of
expected clearing.7 [Figure 4, category II]

Appendix A: Offset Due Diligence Checklist provides an example of how the
selection of offsets can be communicated to interested stakeholders. Each
of the criteria in the checklist is briefly explained below.

• native forest from managed regrowth: changing land management
practices to allow regrowth of native forests [Figure 4, category IV]
• forestry plantation: recognises the carbon captured in plantation forests
[Figure 4, category IV]
• tidal restoration of blue carbon ecosystems: projects that remove or
modify tidal restriction mechanisms and allow tidal flow to be introduced
to an area of land that results in soil carbon sequestration and carbon
sequestered in above and below ground biomass [Figure 4, category IV]

Additionality

Additionality requires that the carbon removal project would not have
happened without the contribution of the offset. “GHG reductions are
additional if they would not have occurred in the absence of a market for
offset credits” 9

• soil carbon: plants absorb CO2 via photosynthesis and transfer some of
this carbon into the soil. Land management practices can be applied to
improve how carbon is stored and maintained in soils. [Figure 4, category
IV], and

Testing for additionality rarely provides an absolute or binary result. There
are many subjective decisions that determine the degree of additionality.
Set the evidence bar too high and nothing can be called additional, set it
too low and everything qualifies as additional.

• savanna fire management: carbon emissions may be avoided by activities
that reduce GHG emissions from fire in savannas. Management activities
including annual early season burning to reduce the frequency and
intensity of late dry season fires [Figure 4, category I].

A common criterion is financial additionality, i.e. the carbon reduction/
removal would not have occurred without the financial incentive of the
offset trade, but even this criterion is difficult, if not impossible to prove.
ACCU’s, as an example, must meet the following additionality criteria:

Note: While these methods are all nature-based they do not necessarily
provide the same levels of offset quality especially in relation to additionality
and permanence. Further due diligence is required to establish the integrity
of the carbon reduction or removal.

“Emission reductions or removal must:
• be new projects
• not be required to meet government regulations, or
• not be part of another government program.”

6
Descriptions are largely from the Clean
Energy Regulator

https://icvcm.org/the-core-carbonprinciples/

8

https://australiainstitute.org.au/post/
serious-integrity-concerns-aroundaustralias-junk-carbon-credits/
7

Carbon offsets, Last but not later: A framework for the environmental integrity of offsets in the property sector.

9
https://www.offsetguide.org/high-qualityoffsets/additionality/

20

Carbon offsets, Last but not later: A framework for the environmental integrity of offsets in the property sector.

21

Permanence

To be effective as an offset, carbon removals need to last for a period
similar to the period carbon emission influence the environment. The range
of greenhouse gases (CO2, CH4 etc) experience differing decay periods in
the atmosphere with CO2 having an impact for 300 to beyond 1,000 years.10

Avoiding leakage

In effect, a nature-based offset is a service of nature facilitated by a project
manager. The services of nature are in two parts, the capture of carbon and
the storage of carbon for the medium to long term. Nature-based offsets
may be considered as only short to medium term carbon removal because
of the uncertainties inherent in the natural environment and related to
socio/economic actions. Even a 100-year time frame creates unique
challenges for contracting, measurement and monitoring.

Carbon leakage can occur with any carbon reduction or removal project.
Leakage refers to increases or reductions in removals that occur outside the
project boundary as a consequence of the project activity.11 Direct leakage
occurs when an emissions activity is moved to another location, outside
the project boundary, while indirect leakage occurs when the benefits of an
emissions removal project are negated by emissions increases outside the
project boundary.
For example, fossil fuels used in tractors and other management vehicle
trips required to support a forestry regeneration project create indirect
leakage emissions that dilute the impact of the offset project. Another form
of leakage occurs when an area of land previously used for agriculture is
allowed to regenerate forest while another area is cleared for agricultural to
continue.

Some offsets are credited based on a 25-year lifetime of carbon storage.
The environmental merit of these offsets is difficult to determine. As such,
any strategy should consider strongly why these are being procured when
compared against longer term lifetimes. A 25-year lifetime offset is unlikely
to meet permanence criteria and may need to be replaced, with more
offsets, at the end of the 25-year period.

Steps to avoiding impacts of leakage:
• analyse each offset project to determine where leakage could occur and
document the findings in the offset due diligence checklist (Appendix A)
- query if emissions created in the conduct of the project have been
netted out

Contracting for services that occur over 100+ years presents unique
challenges but also the opportunity to adapt to time scales relevant to
nature’s capacity to balance ecological systems (see Nature-based Balance
Sheet below).

- query if there’s a risk that emissions have been transferred to another
location
•	purchase a portfolio of offsets, reducing the impact of leakage in any
one project, and

Strategies to reduce risks of impermanence include taking a portfolio
approach, diversifying the locations and types of nature-based offsets
along with purchasing a safety buffer of emissions.

•	purchase and retire a contingency quantity of offsets (eg, an additional
20%).

https://climate.nasa.gov/news/2915/theatmosphere-getting-a-handle-on-carbondioxide/#:~:text=Carbon%20dioxide%20
is%20a%20different,between%20300%20
to%201%2C000%20years.

10

11
Emissions Reduction Assurance Committee
Information Paper March 2021

Carbon offsets, Last but not later: A framework for the environmental integrity of offsets in the property sector.

22

Carbon offsets, Last but not later: A framework for the environmental integrity of offsets in the property sector.

23

Measurable

Methods for measuring carbon removal must be accurate and not generate
overestimates of carbon removal. Overcrediting can easily occur when
calculating the scale of offsets. Most projects must compare actual
emissions (or removals) to a counterfactual case, quantifying what would
have occurred under business as usual. Overcrediting occurs when the
counterfactual estimate allows for more generous attribution of carbon
reductions.

Avoiding double
counting

Some offsets are more susceptible to double counting than others.
Internationally traded offsets are open to double counting until Paris
Agreement compliant systems are agreed that adjust host countries
emissions reduction baselines to compensate for the transaction. This
is particularly the case where offsets are used as part of compliance
schemes. (e.g. Australia’s Safeguard Mechanism)
In the voluntary market, an emission reduction created in one country
and transferred to an organisation in another country may not be double
counted if it is reflected in the originating nations emissions but not in
the national inventory of the organisation’s country.13 As an example,
the Australian Government doesn’t have a mechanism to record use of
voluntary offsets by Australian businesses for them to be included in
Australia’s national inventory.

Measurement is most accurate when it relies on field measurements
post the carbon removal although some projects are “forward crediting”
allowing investment to occur at project origination. There needs to be a
balance struck between additionality, measurement, and any certification
requirements that the creator of a nature-based offset is required to comply
with. Forward crediting offsets may best demonstrate additionality but with
a lower confidence in measurement of future carbon stored.

Country A

Measurement needs to consider leakage (as described earlier) and needs
to be repeated through the lifetime of a carbon removal project.
ACCUs can only be created using measurement methods approved by the
Clean Energy Regulator with the regulations requiring that sequestration
projects (including carbon removal) have a risk of reversal buffer of 5%
when the project is subject to a 100-year permanence period. The buffer is
designed to allow for carbon losses related to bushfire (that haven’t been
reversed within the permanence period) or other loss of carbon.12

Uniquely identified

Organisation A

Offset

The ability to make a unique claim or have an exclusive right to an offset is
critical to offset credibility and avoids the potential for double counting. A
certificate and registry system where offsets can be retired for a specific
purpose provides a high degree of transparency and allows for a visible
market of tradeable offsets.

Global inventory

Country B

An alternative to the registry model are contracts over specific carbon
capture projects where offset purchases include an obligation that offsets
are sold to only one customer/project.

Organisation B

Figure 5 Offsets traded between countries may avoid double counting if they are not included
in both national inventories

Even domestic emissions reduction offsets created as part of an energy
efficiency project could be double counted unless the host organisation
makes an adjustment to their own carbon account.
Double counting can occur at both ends of an offset transaction unless
controls are implemented. An offset generation project can sell a carbon
removal to more than one customer, while an offset customer can apply an
offset against multiple projects. Ensuring the certificate registry contains
sufficient detail to identify the precise purpose of an offset when retired
helps to remove opportunities for double claiming.

12
http://www.cleanenergyregulator.gov.au/
ERF/Choosing-a-project-type/Opportunitiesfor-the-land-sector/Risk-of-reversal-buffer

14

13
Briefing report on the article 6 rules agreed
at COP 26 – Gilbert and Tobin

A best practice guide for carbon project
developers - February 2020

Carbon offsets, Last but not later: A framework for the environmental integrity of offsets in the property sector.

Seeking free, prior and informed consent
from Indigenous communities for carbon
projects

24

Local, nature-based, offsets are less susceptible to double counting. The
strongest controls are to have offsets registered on a publicly accessible
registry that uniquely identifies each offset, where and when it was
generated, the current owner and the specific project it has been retired
against. The more specific the information in the registry the lower the
chance of double counting.

Carbon offsets, Last but not later: A framework for the environmental integrity of offsets in the property sector.

25

Avoiding social
or environmental
harms

For a project to produce high quality offsets it should not create other
harms, social or environmental. Compliance with laws is a baseline measure
and not an indicator of offset quality.

Environmental and
social co-benefits

Investing in nature-based carbon offsets can result in a range of associated
benefits such as providing habitat supporting biodiversity, providing
indigenous employment, maintaining connection with land and even helping
to protect soil and waterways.

The vintage of an offset, the year that it was created, can be an indicator
of offset quality. Older offsets in the market may fail contemporary quality
criteria and may have been certified under older schemes or scheme rules.
Climate Active requires offsets to have a vintage date after 201215 and
Green Star requires offsets to have a vintage date after 2016. Programs
such as SBTi could introduce more stringent vintage requirements therefore
it is important to keep up to date with the program rules before committing
to an offset purchase.

In Australia, and in relation to nature-based offsets, it is an important
condition of offset project development that free, prior and informed
consent from Indigenous communities has been obtained.

If these co-benefits are going to be included in the disclosures of an
organisation, they should be described in the net zero strategy with targets
and the system of monitoring detailed as shown in the Natural Capital
Balance Sheet in Appendix B.
Offset co-benefits can be linked to the UN Sustainable Development Goals.

Monitoring plan

Vintage

Caution is required where offsets may be purchased and retired upfront
as part of a commitment for carbon neutrality of a development project.
These offsets may be years old once the construction phase of the project
is complete and the final embodied carbon account can be completed and
offsets applied for carbon neutral certification.

Offset portfolio

As described elsewhere, nature-based offsets are a long-term commitment
relying on nature to provide a specific service. A system of audits over
the permanence period is required to ensure that the carbon is stored
and maintained as expected. These obligations can be contracted to a
supplier and maximum confidence is achieved when periodic reports, using
a recognised method of measurement and audit, are provided back to the
offset user.

Creating a portfolio of offsets provides several valuable functions, including
diversifying the risks of particular projects achieving/maintaining the
expected carbon abatement. For instance, a portfolio comprising naturebased reforestation projects, geographically spread, and a small proportion
of direct air capture offsets can achieve a target “average” price while
supporting an emerging technology.
Another consideration for the portfolio is whether a reserve pool of offsets
is intended to accumulate to replace any offsets that are found to have
failed. The pool could accumulate over time to a predefined % of total
offsets retired.

Monitoring and reporting can also be applied to the expected co-benefits.

Offset market
development

Leaders in net zero have an opportunity to assist in the development of
markets for offset products. Markets that enjoy the benefits of diversity in
offset project development and techniques can be more effective and more
efficient in abating emissions. Allocating a percentage of offset spend to
novel and emerging offset types can assist in developing new opportunities.

12
http://www.cleanenergyregulator.gov.au/
ERF/Choosing-a-project-type/Opportunitiesfor-the-land-sector/Risk-of-reversal-buffer

Climate Active: Technical Guidance
Manual, p58

15

Briefing report on the article 6 rules agreed
at COP 26 – Gilbert and Tobin
13

Carbon offsets, Last but not later: A framework for the environmental integrity of offsets in the property sector.

26

Carbon offsets, Last but not later: A framework for the environmental integrity of offsets in the property sector.

27

Offset rating
systems

There are emerging rating schemes for offsets that offer an assessment
of offset quality against defined criteria. BeZero carbon ratings compare
projects using six critical risk factors affecting the quality offsets:
additionality, over-crediting, non-permanence, leakage, perverse incentives,
and policy and political environment.
The CDR Database (carbon dioxide removal) provides assessments of
offset projects using the measures of mechanism, volume, negativity,
permanence, additionality and specificity. A sample extract from the CDR
Database is shown. Although maintenance of this database has been
discontinued it serves as a useful reference for rating criteria.

Documenting the
offset strategy

To mitigate claims of greenwashing it’s important to demonstrate that
offsets are genuinely the emissions mitigation method of last resort and
that plans are in place to eliminate residual emissions in a reasonable time.
Thereafter, it’s all about defining and communicating the quality criteria and
how risks of quality failure are approached. Appendix A provides a sample
due diligence checklist that can be used to evaluate and communicate the
attributes of offsets.
In addition to the quality of specific offsets, organisations can apply other
risk management measures that increase the probability of a portfolio
delivering the desired outcomes.
Additionality and permanence risk mitigation strategies include:
•	purchasing a portfolio of offsets from different removal mechanisms and
sources reducing the risk that all offsets fail to maintain quality
•	establishing a process of always buying and retiring a fixed % more
offsets than emissions helps to reduce the risk of underperforming
offsets (example: for every tonne of offset required, purchase 1.25 tonnes
of offsets)
•	creating an insurance pool of offsets to apply in case of
underperformance, and
•	make good commitment: where an offset is shown to underperform in any
of the quality criteria commit to replacing the offset with another that is
more effective.
Use the Offset Due Diligence Checklist in Appendix A to document the
attributes and reasons for selecting preferred offsets.

16

https://bezerocarbon.com/ratings/

https://carbonplan.org/research/cdrdatabase
17

Carbon offsets, Last but not later: A framework for the environmental integrity of offsets in the property sector.

28

Carbon offsets, Last but not later: A framework for the environmental integrity of offsets in the property sector.

29

Accounting
for offsets

Carbon accounting is most often conducted on an annual basis, allowing an
inventory to be aggregated and year on year change to be demonstrated
in both compliance (NGERS) and voluntary reports. The annual accounting
process leads to offsets being treated as an annual transaction cancelled
out against an emission to achieve the net zero status.
The description of nature-based offsets in this paper demonstrates that
nature is providing a service for 100+ years and like any other service
provider good management practice demands that there is a process to
check that the contracted services are being provided. Stored carbon
and any co-benefits are ongoing Natural Capital Assets whether they are
“owned” or “leased”, as is the typical case of an offset. It makes sense
to manage them like any other asset of the business that has enduring
features.

Measuring and
valuing associated
benefits

• soil and sediment retention
• water purification
• coastal protection.
These co-benefits to the carbon offset generally enhance biodiversity and
are restorative to the environment and can be measured and managed over
time to ensure planned outcomes are achieved.

Case Study – Accounting for Nature®
Accounting for Nature (AfN) is an Australian not-for-profit organisation
who implement the Accounting for Nature® Framework. Accounting for
Nature® is a global outcomes-based environmental condition accounting
framework for measuring, monitoring, certifying and reporting the condition
of environmental over time. Environmental Assets include the following
categories:

The Natural Capital Balance Sheet can act as a cumulative register of
offsets that an organisation has applied in net zero accounts with the
register maintained over time with up-to-date management reports from
offset project administrators. This process gives greater confidence of the
permanence of offsets.
An example of a Natural Capital Balance Sheet is shown in Appendix B.

Organisations that intend or could build up a bank of offsets should work
with their finance team to understand the implications of holding an asset
of this type that has a commercial value until it has been retired against a
specific project. Buying offsets upfront results in the organisation holding a
tradeable asset.

NATIVE VEGETATION

30

SOIL

NATIVE FAUNA

FRESH WATER

MARINE

The Framework relies on summarising complex scientific information
(i.e.multiple indicators of condition) into a single metric – the Econd®
to describe the condition of each asset as a score from 0-100 (100
being reference/undegraded condition), so that condition can be easily
understood by anyone and more easily be incorporated into decision
making. An Environmental Condition Account is generated in accordance
with a fit-for-purpose and scientifically rigorous AfN Accredited Method.

18

Carbon offsets, Last but not later: A framework for the environmental integrity of offsets in the property sector.

• nursery population and habitat maintenance

• waterflow regulation, and

The commercial property sector is familiar with managing long lasting
assets on balance sheet and this process is instructive and can be applied
to long-term management of nature-based offsets.

Financial
accounting for
offsets

Projects that include reforestation and restoration of natural environments
are also a means of providing other nature-based services including:

https://www.accountingfornature.org/

Carbon offsets, Last but not later: A framework for the environmental integrity of offsets in the property sector.

31

Measuring and
valuing associated
benefits cont.

Environmental Condition Accounts can be used for many different reasons
including, but not limited to: supporting green claims (such as “nature
positive”), identify nature-risk, and underpin nature-related disclosures and
reporting (e.g. under the TNFD, or ESG reporting), underpin environmental
markets e.g. nature-based solutions for climate change through measuring
environmental co-benefits associated with carbon offset projects.

Procuring
offsets

Membership of the Carbon Market Institute is a good sign that they are well
acquainted with the Australian offset market.20

In particular, landholders developing nature-based offsets would monitor
the performance of the project over time using an AfN Accredited Method
and achieve certification of the outcomes.
ASSET CLASS

ECOND®
2020

ECOND® TREND
2010-2020

CONFIDENCE
LEVEL®

STATUS

Procurement of offsets will often be through a market intermediary that
specialises in offset transactions. Ensure that they are AFSL licensed,
can demonstrate a track record in the type of transaction you need and
understand your requirements for the type and integrity of offsets.

Banking and
retiring

76
SOIL

52

The Natural Capital Balance Sheet approach to accumulating a record of
investment in offsets allows for full traceability of offsets and the emissions
they are compensating for.
The Balance Sheet is like an asset register and should be managed in a
similar way with a process for ongoing evaluation of nature-based offsets
to ensure the expected carbon removal is achieved and maintained over
time. Maintenance processes could be documented in an organisations
Environmental Management System for ongoing management and
continuous improvement.
Some organisations may elect to purchase bundles of offsets that can
be identified in the register while not being retired or allocated against a
project, creating an offset “bank”. The Balance Sheet allows transparency
to this process.

FRESH WATER

Similarly, any allocation of offsets to create a safety buffer or contingency
pool can be clearly identified. Vintage of certificates remains important
from a relevance perspective. Older certificates may have been generated
using different rules and potentially with less rigor than offsets with a more
recent creation date.

24
NATIVE
VEGETATION

https://carbonmarketinstitute.org/
membership/

20

Carbon offsets, Last but not later: A framework for the environmental integrity of offsets in the property sector.

32

Carbon offsets, Last but not later: A framework for the environmental integrity of offsets in the property sector.

33

Conducting offset
due diligence

In summary:
• use the Due Diligence Checklist in Appendix A to document how
offsets meet the quality criteria.
Having developed a set of criteria defining the organisation’s expectations
of an acceptable offset it is important to demonstrate how particular
offsets, applied as part of a net zero inventory, have met them.
The Due Diligence Checklist in Appendix A is an example of a simple form
that could be used to demonstrate the primary and critical features of a
sequestration project. This information could also be included in a net zero
or carbon neutral “Public Disclosure Statement” as used in the Climate
Active program.
The Checklist is also a useful communication tool when procuring offsets
focusing the attention market intermediaries to source only offsets that
meet the criteria.

3

Carbon offsets, Last but not later: A framework for the environmental integrity of offsets in the property sector.

34

Carbon offsets, Last but not later: A framework for the environmental integrity of offsets in the property sector.

35

Maintaining
offset quality

In summary:
• nature-based offsets are a long-term commitment to the stewardship
of nature-based services. The Natural Capital Balance Sheet in
Appendix B is one way to document the cumulative investment in
nature-based offsets and to track their performance over time.
Nature-based offsets can provide a unique service in relation to the
capture and storage of carbon for the long term. To ensure the reliability
of the carbon sequestration over 100+ years presents a challenge, not
only of recalling the offsets that were applied in previous years, but also
understanding where information is available to satisfy anyone of the
ongoing integrity of the carbon stored.
To provide the highest certainty that offsets are maintained, organisations
may choose to monitor the performance of sequestration projects through
time but could also contract out this responsibility, potentially to the
sequestration project manager, or preferably through the offset certifiers
and the registry system.

4

Carbon offsets, Last but not later: A framework for the environmental integrity of offsets in the property sector.

Ideally, the offset registry will provide ongoing access to audit reports that
detail the success, or otherwise, of projects. The offset would still need to
be in an organisation’s register so that routine testing of the offset integrity
can be completed.
The Natural Capital Balance Sheet in Appendix B is proposed as an example
of a register where offsets can accumulate over time. It not only provides
a simple reference to offsets used historically it also demonstrates the
accumulated investment in nature contributing to nature positive outcomes.
Where an offset is found to not have delivered the carbon sequestration
expected remediation steps might be required. For environmental integrity
a failed offset must be remediated or “made good”. The sequestration
project manager may offer to replace it from their risk pool, or an
organisation could choose to apply offsets from a risk pool they hold.

36

Carbon offsets, Last but not later: A framework for the environmental integrity of offsets in the property sector.

37

Future of
offsets

As the target date for many net zero commitments approaches, the global
demand for quality offsets can be expected to increase while supply
remains limited.
While it isn’t the role of this framework to provide advice on the future
cost of offsets, the supply demand imbalance and the cost of creating
highest quality offsets are likely to lead to an increase in prices. Naturebased offsets, with their accompanying co-benefits and low input costs are
constrained by land availability and competition with agriculture for land
area. Climate change may also challenge how carbon can be stored using
nature-based systems.
Negative emission technologies (NETs) that capture and store CO2 are
predicted to play a large role in future mitigation of global warming. They
include Direct Air Carbon Capture and Storage (DACCS) and Bioenergy with
Carbon Capture and Storage (BECCS). Each with significant input costs,
such as energy in the case of DACCS.
EY provide this estimate of future offset prices:
Increasing demand, expectations of quality, and unit supply cost will
make carbon credits scarce and expensive

5

Carbon offsets, Last but not later: A framework for the environmental integrity of offsets in the property sector.

Carbon credit price outlook, 2020-2050
US$ per t-CO2e; 2020 dollars
300

Natire-enabled
Net Zero

250
200

Tech-enabled
Net Zero

150

Below 2°c
US$
150-200

100

Announced Plans
(well above 2°c)

US$
80-150

50
0

Central price
estimate

2020

2035

2050

Commercial property companies will increasingly find it most cost effective
to eliminate operational emissions avoiding the need for offsets.

21
https://assets.ey.com/content/dam/eysites/ey-com/en_au/topics/sustainability/
ey-net-zero-centre-carbon-offsetpublication-20220530.pdf

38

Carbon offsets, Last but not later: A framework for the environmental integrity of offsets in the property sector.

39

Appendix

Appendix A:
Offset due diligence checklist

Carbon offset - quality evaluation
Offset type:

Emissions removal through
environmental plantings

e.g. Emissions reduction
Emissions removal

Permanence:

ACCU

e.g. Gold Standard
Verra
ACCU
Other

QUALITY
CRITERIA

EVALUATION
NOTES

SCORE (0 - 10, WHERE 10
= FULLY MEETS CRITERIA)

GUIDANCE

Additionality:

Meets primary ACCU requirements,
ex grazing lands recovered with
environmental plantings since 2010

10

New project, not required by
regulation, not part of a government
program

Permanence:

100 year + permanence through on-title
protection

7

25 years
<=100 years
> 100 years
Mineralised into stable geological
formations

Leakage:

Leakage is mitigated where the
displaced form of grazing is no longer
conducted in the region

6

Describe potential for leakage
pathways and how avoided

Measurable:

Measured as per ACCU methods

9

Is carbon storage measured or
planned ?

Unique
identified:

Certificate numbers provided on
purchase with allocation to project
noted in registry

10

Link to registry, type of certificate, or
form of contract

Double
counting:

The creator of offsets provides a
declaration that the emission removal is
not accounted for by any other entity

10

Traceability from generation to
retirement against specific emissions

Social or
environmental
harm

The project is supported by the Regional
indigenous Land Council and Regional
LGA

10

The project has been reviewed for
other social or environmental harm

Environmental
benefits:

Environmental plantings provide habitat
for endangered parrots. Accounting
for Nature (AfN) methods are used
to measure habitat quality at 5 yearly
intervals
Watercourse protection is provided
throughout the planting areas with
improved water quality and mitigation of
erosion. Measured using AfN methods

10

Goals for environmental benefits and
how they'll be measured

Social
benefits:

The project provides traineeships
for indigenous students to study the
ecology and biodiversity welfare.
Reported to offset users each 2 years.

8

Goals for social benefits and how
they'll be measured

8

How will stored carbon be monitored ?
What frequency of reporting ?

Monitoring plan: ACCU methods

Carbon offsets, Last but not later: A framework for the environmental integrity of offsets in the property sector.

40

Carbon offsets, Last but not later: A framework for the environmental integrity of offsets in the property sector.

41

Appendix B:
Example natural capital balance sheet

Carbon offset - quality evaluation cont.
QUALITY
CRITERIA

EVALUATION
NOTES

Market
development:

Vintage:

Offset
portfolio/
Buffer reserve

SCORE (0 - 10, WHERE 10
= FULLY MEETS CRITERIA)

GUIDANCE

8

How these offsets contribute to
creating investment in natural capital
and general development of the offset
market

Original environmental plantings
occurred in 2010, measurement and
certificate creation has occurred in
2015, 2020. Only 2020 certificates are
used in this case

10

ACCU risk reversal buffer of 5% is
applied. Proposed to purchase a
further 5% buffer in an accumulating
account

7

Offset evaluation score

8.69

YEAR OF
PURCHASE

SOURCE OF
SERVICES

REGISTRY

CERTIFICATE
NUMBERS

DUE DILIGENCE
CHECKLIST

2018

ACME Offsets

CER

xxx-yyy

(link)

2019

ZEUS Offsets

CER

xxx-yyy

(link)

Forestry Offfsets

ACCU

xxx-yyy

(link)

Is the date of offset creation within
x years of the planned retirement
date, does the vintage year meet the
requirements of programs such as
Climate Active, Green Star, SBTi
Is the offset intended to be part of
a portfolio, if yes, how are the other
offsets differentiated ? Is there an
intention to hold a reserve buffer pool
of offsets that can be applied should
some fail to deliver expected carbon
abatement ?

Total Natural Capital

NATURE BASED SERVICES*

Total averaged score

GLOBAL
CLIMATE
REGULATION

NURSERY
POPULATION
AND HABIAT
MAINTENANCE

SOIL AND
SEDIMENT
RETENTION

WATER
PURIFICATION
SERVICES

WATERFLOW
REGULATION

COASTAL
PROTECTION

tones CO2e

units

units

units

units

units

3,600
3,200

1,800

2,100

3,600

10,400

1,800

-

2,100

-

-

SUSTAINABLE
DEVELOPMENT
GOAL LINK

ECOSYSTEM
ACCOUNTING
AREA

OFFSET
RETIREMENT
RETIREMENT

RETIREMENT
YEAR

LATEST
CONDITION
REPORT

CONFIDENCE

SDG#

heactares
1,000

Head office travel

2017

2018

High

890

120 Dampier St, Gas

2020

2021

High

900

2,790

Services are as described in: United Nations et al. (2021). System of Environmental-Economic
Accounting - Ecosystem Accounting (SEEA EA). White cover publication, pre-edited text subject
to official editing. Available at: https://seea.un.org/ecosystem-accounting.

*

Carbon offsets, Last but not later: A framework for the environmental integrity of offsets in the property sector.

42

Carbon offsets, Last but not later: A framework for the environmental integrity of offsets in the property sector.

43

Appendix C:
Scope 3 relevance and offsetting

The scope 3 relevance table following provides a generalised ranking of relevance criteria, each organisation is
encouraged to conduct their own, tailored, review and to publish the resulting table for comprehensive transparency.
RELEVANCE CRITERIA FROM GHG PROTOCOL (SCORED 0 TO 5, WHERE 5 IS HIGH INTEREST)
CATEGORY
1. Purchased
goods and
services

SIZE

INFLUENCE RISK

STAKEHOLDERS OUTSOURCING SECTOR
GUIDANCE

OTHER

TOTAL

APPROACH

VOLUNTARY USE OF OFFSETS

5

5

2

5

0

5

0

22

Most relevant to developments, goods and services incorporated into new build. Through
procurement, express a preference for low carbon/carbon neutral goods and services.
Segment expenditure and identify low carbon options

Yes, to compensate for residual emissions while transforming to
eliminate emissions

5

5

2

5

0

5

0

22

Most relevant to operational assets purchasing buildings or assets for
buildings. Through procurement, express a preference for low carbon/carbon
neutral capital equipment. Nominate projects that will track embodied carbon

Yes, to compensate for residual emissions while transforming to
eliminate emissions

1

5

0

0

0

4

0

10

Most relevant to operational assets. Transmission and distribution losses,
linked with energy source information, reduce through efficiency and transition to
renewable energy

Yes, to compensate for residual emissions while transforming to
eliminate emissions

4. Upstream
transportation
and distribution

1

3

0

0

0

4

0

8

Most relevant to developments, transition to electric transport. Typically, low
relevance to operational assets

Yes, to compensate for residual emissions while transforming to
eliminate emissions

5. Waste
generated in
operations

3

5

2

5

0

5

0

20

Most relevant to operational assets. Waste management practices reduce
organics to landfill and increases recycling resulting in lower emissions from
tenant generated waste

Yes, to compensate for residual emissions while transforming to
eliminate emissions

1

5

0

1

0

1

0

8

Most relevant to organisational carbon accounts, reduced through avoided
business travel and choice of travel mode. Low relevance to operational assets

Yes, to compensate for residual emissions while transforming to
eliminate emissions

7. Employee
commuting

1

2

0

0

0

0

0

3

May be included in organisational carbon accounts, limited to employee travel
for carbon neutral certification. Low relevance to operational assets.

Yes, to compensate for residual emissions while transforming to
eliminate emissions

8. Upstream
leased assets

1

5

0

0

0

0

0

6

May be included in organisational carbon accounts for carbon neutral certification. Low
relevance to operational assets.

Yes, to compensate for residual emissions while transforming to
eliminate emissions

9. Downstream
transportation

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

Generally not applicable

NA

10. Processing of
sold product

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

Generally not applicable

NA

4

4

2

4

0

0

0

14

Most relevant to developments, encourages energy efficiency and renewable
energy systems be installed early.

Yes, to compensate for residual emissions while transforming to
eliminate emissions and where future emissions can be
reasonably estimated

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

Most relevant to developments. Embodied carbon in demolition materials is
retained through high grade recycling. Demolition equipment moves to electric
and renewable electricity

Yes, to compensate for residual emissions while transforming to
eliminate emissions if end of life emissions can be reasonably
estimated

Most relevant to operational assets. Emissions associated with tenant use of
leased space. Collaboration for energy efficiency and access to renewable
energy

Yes, to compensate for residual emissions. Renewable energy
certificates (LGCs) are preferred for mitigation of electricity
related emissions as a sustainable solution. For either offset or
REC approach there should be a price signal reflected back to the
consumer to inform behaviours and management of energy

Generally not applicable

NA

Where investment is made in operational property the preference is to have an
efficient asset powered by renewable energy.

Yes, to compensate for residual emissions where the scope 1 &
2 emissions from these assets have not been mitigated

2. Capital goods

3. Fuel and
energy related

6. Business travel

11. Use of sold
products
12. End of life

13. Downstream
leased assets

14. Franchises

15. Investments

5

2

0

4

0

5

0

16

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

5

3

0

4

0

5

0

17

Carbon offsets, Last but not later: A framework for the environmental integrity of offsets in the property sector.

44

Carbon offsets, Last but not later: A framework for the environmental integrity of offsets in the property sector.

45

The GHG Protocol provides guidance on the relevance criteria to be considered when creating a carbon inventory
including scope 3 emissions. These definitions support the development of inventories that meet the Protocol
principles of relevance, completeness, transparency, and accuracy.
Defining the relevance criteria:23

Size

They contribute to the company’s total anticipated scope 3 emissions

Influence

There are potential emissions reductions that could be undertaken or influenced by the company

Risk

They contribute to the company’s risk exposure (e.g., climate change related risks such as financial, regulatory, supply
chain, product and customer, litigation, and reputational risks)

Stakeholders

They are deemed critical by stakeholders (e.g., customers, suppliers, investors, or civil society

Outsourcing

They are outsourced activities previously performed in-house or activities outsourced by the reporting company that are
typically performed in-house by other companies in the reporting company’s sector

Sector guidance

They have been identified as significant by sector-specific guidance

Other

The meet any additional criteria for determining relevance developed by the company or industry sector

23
Corporate Value Chain (Scope 3) Accounting
and Reporting Standard – GHG Protocol

Carbon offsets, Last but not later: A framework for the environmental integrity of offsets in the property sector.

46

Carbon offsets, Last but not later: A framework for the environmental integrity of offsets in the property sector.

47

Level 1, 11 Barrack Street
Sydney NSW 2000

T: (02) 9033 1900
E: info@propertycouncil.com.au
W: propertycouncil.com.au

