A practical
guide to
electrification
For new buildings

Established in 2002, Green Building Council of Australia (GBCA)
is the nation’s authority on sustainable buildings, communities
and cities. Our vision is for healthy, resilient and positive places
for people. Our purpose is to lead the sustainable transformation
of the built environment. GBCA represents more than 550
individual companies with a combined annual turnover of more
than $46 billion.
Technical partner

Cundall is a global, independent, multi-disciplinary consultancy
delivering sustainable engineering and design solutions across
the built environment. We are proud of our contribution on many
of Australia's leading green buildings and our engagement with
industry to help drive sustainable outcomes Cundall is a founding
signatory of the World Green Building Council's Net Zero Carbon
Building Commitment, a Carbon Neutral certified business
globally, and a One Planet endorsed company since 2012. In 2021
we launched Zero Carbon Design 2030 - an initiative to deliver
zero carbon solutions on every project we do, with the end goal
that after 2030 we will not work on any project that is not zero
carbon.

Funding partners

The CEFC has a unique mission to accelerate investment in
Australia’s transition to net zero emissions. We invest to lead the
market, operating with commercial rigour to address some of
Australia’s toughest emissions challenges. We’re working with
our co-investors across renewable energy generation and energy
storage, as well as agriculture, infrastructure, property, transport
and waste. Through the Advancing Hydrogen Fund, we’re
supporting the growth of a clean, innovative, safe and competitive
hydrogen industry. And as Australia’s largest dedicated cleantech
investor, we continue to back cleantech entrepreneurs through
the Clean Energy Innovation Fund. With $10 billion to invest on
behalf of the Australian Government, we work to deliver a positive
return for taxpayers across our portfolio.
The Department of Planning and Environment brings together
specialists in urban and regional planning, natural resources,
industry, environment, heritage, Aboriginal and social housing,
and regional New South Wales.

Image credit: Peter Clarke

This guide outlines the steps involved in delivering an all-electric new
building and the types of technologies that can be used today to replace
natural gas systems with electric solutions. If you are a building owner,
developer, facilities manager, consultant or building professional, this
guide is for you.

Understand the case for electrification

Delivering
Climate
Positive
Buildings

These are the steps needed to decarbonise buildings. This guide covers the
first: how to eliminate fossil fuels for space heating, hot water, and cooking in
new buildings. A second guide will be published focusing on existing
buildings. We encourage you to apply all these steps in your project.

Standard building

Climate change ● Investor benefits ● Resilience and risk reduction
● Health and wellbeing ● Tenant and consumer preferences

Typical greenhouse
gas (GHG) emissions
due to energy use and
construction.

Review case studies
PHIVE ● ACT Government office ● Nightingale ● Gillies Hall
● Burwood Brickworks

This guide

How to use
this guide

Discover alternatives to typical fossil fuel use
Space heating ● Domestic hot water ● Cooking ● Backup power
● Other

Fossil fuel free
Eliminate natural gas for
space heating, domestic
hot water and cooking.

Highly efficient

Consider design, costs and benefits

Legend

Design features ● Key costs and savings ● Calculating costs and
benefits

GHG
EMISSIONS

Stakeholders involved

Space heating,
domestic hot water
Natural gas and cooking.

The stakeholders ● Responsibilities ● Marketing your buildings
Electricity

Rating tools and frameworks
Green Star ● NABERS ● GRESB ● Climate Bonds Initiative ● SBTI

Ventilation, cooling,
lighting, pumps, small
power, lifts, security,
controls, and IT systems.
Emergency (backup)
power, and refrigerants.

Other
Emissions from
products and materials
used in construction
Materials in and from construction
construction activities.

More information
Key myths ● References ● Appendix: Terminology and making claims

A practical guide to electrification: For new buildings

USED FOR

01

Significantly reduce all building
energy consumption through
demand reduction, energy
efficiency and effective controls.

Powered by
renewables
Provide all electricity from 100%
renewable sources – on-site
and/or off-site.

Built with lower
upfront carbon
Significantly reduce embodied
carbon through design,
construction activities and
material/product selection.

Offset with nature
After reducing all GHG emissions
as much as possible procure
credible nature based offsets.
A practical guide to electrification: For new buildings

02

A guide to
electrification

Climate change, health and wellbeing, natural resource depletion,
consumer preferences, investor demand - these are key issues that
are impacting how we develop new buildings in our cities. A key
challenge across all of them is how we move away from traditional
solutions to deliver more sustainable and higher performing
buildings.
If we are to reduce GHG emissions due to the operation of buildings
and meet net zero carbon goals, new buildings must be fossil fuel free
primarily by eliminating the use of natural gas.
An all-electric building comes with many benefits – from easy access
to renewable energy, to healthy spaces for occupants. As we move
into a decarbonised world, all-electric buildings are future-proofed
from having to be refurbished to eliminate outdated technologies.
They have less risk of becoming stranded assets.
In summary,
Natural gas represents between 10% and 30% of building GHG
emissions. The electricity grid is decarbonising rapidly, while
the decarbonisation of the natural gas network is unlikely in the
foreseeable future.
Technologies are available to design out fossil fuels for all
typical uses in a building today.
Electrification makes sense from a cost perspective. It provides
multiple benefits beyond just operational cost savings.
Changes in Green Star and NABERS means that electrification
is no longer a barrier to higher ratings.
Corporate tenants and debt and equity investors are
increasingly attracted to all-electric buildings powered by
renewables.

All new buildings can be built to be all-electric
today. The technologies and desire exist. There is
no reason not to build them.
The most common uses of gas and fossil fuels in
buildings that can be electrified are:
Natural gas for space heating, domestic hot water and cooking
Diesel for emergency and backup generators.
There are other sources of gas that are found in some buildings such
as gas for high heat industrial processes, portable gas heaters in
external spaces, gas for laboratory purposes or similar. While not the
subject of the guide, building owners are encouraged to consider
alternatives to natural gas where possible.

A practical guide to electrification: For new buildings

03

The case for
electrification
– the right
solution today

Burning fossil fuels to generate heat, energy and to cook food has
been the go-to solution since the industrial revolution. Natural gas
boilers and cookers are the pinnacle of this technology in buildings
and have previously offered lower carbon solutions than grid
electricity generated using coal.
But we are seeing a revolution in clean energy to address the
challenges of climate change, air quality and energy affordability.
Electrifying buildings is an essential and relatively easy step to do
this. The technologies already exist - the key challenges are changing
perceptions and improving understanding of the benefits of
electrification and how to implement it.
If a business case is required for an all-electric building, then the
following factors can be considered:
Climate change: all-electric buildings powered by renewables
are the preferred pathway to decarbonise our built environment.
Removing fossil fuels from buildings is necessary to reduce our
climate change impacts. Electrification is also the best enabler
to deliver buildings fully powered by renewables today.
Investor benefits: investors are looking for assets that are on a
clear decarbonisation pathway. All-electric buildings that use
renewable energy will be able to access sustainable finance.
Resilience and risk reduction: as we move into a state of
decarbonising the economy, there will be a need to retrofit
assets and remove equipment using fossil fuels from service.
An all-electric building is a step ahead, making it a more
valuable and desirable asset, ready for the future.
Health and safety benefits: using natural gas in buildings
generates toxic air pollutants. Occupants are exposed to these
pollutants. These impacts can increase asthma and exacerbate
respiratory illnesses. All-electric services eliminate these
pollutants, improving the health and wellbeing of building
occupants.
Tenant and consumer preferences: many organisations have
clear aims to decarbonise and have public goals to do so before
2030. Natural gas and other fossil fuels are incompatible with
these goals. An all-electric building will be more attractive to
these organisations and consumers as well.
Each of these reasons is expanded in the next few pages, including
valuable references that provide more information. Understanding
the case for electrification will help create an accurate business
case for an all-electric building.

A practical guide to electrification: For new buildings

04

1

we drastically reduce GHG emissions. If we don’t, the effects of this
warming will be dangerous, costly, and irreversible.

The built environment is a significant contributor to our national
emissions. It accounts for almost a quarter of total emissions in
Australia. Of these emissions, natural gas use in buildings accounts
for 10% to 30% 2 of all operational emissions. Eliminating these
emissions matters.
It is not only the amount of emissions that matter – there is a time
impact as well. Emissions from the use of natural gas, or methane,
include both the direct emissions from combustion in a building
(Scope 1) and the emissions from its extraction, processing, and
distribution (Scope 3). The Scope 3 emissions due to methane
escaping the atmosphere are three times more impactful over a 20year span than the CO2 produceda when combusted.

Grid electricity Scope 2 & 3 GHG emissions factor (kgCO2e per kWh)

To minimise the risk of catastrophic climate change the average
The case for
global temperature rise must be keep to below 1.5°C. According to
electrification – the Intergovernmental Panel for Climate Change (IPCC) , the
climate change world has eight to ten years left before we cross this threshold unless

Victoria

0.95

NSW &
Australia
avg.

0.77

South
Australia

0.34

100%
renewable
electricity

0

The IPCC noted in its latest report1 that methane emissions should
be reduced at a much faster rate than previously assumed. This
formed the basis of the Global Methane Pledge3 at COP26 in
Glasgow.

a As noted by the US EPA,

when the Global
Warming Potential
(GWP) of methane is
measured over 20 years
(GWP20), the impact of
methane is 84-87 times
that of CO2. If measured
over 100 years
(GWP100), the impact is
21 times that of CO2. This
is due to methane being
shorter lived in the
atmosphere before
breaking down into CO2
and water. This CO2
continues to warm the
atmosphere.

Other technologies and zero carbon fuels have a part to play in
decarbonising our economy, but they are likely better used in other
sectors such as transport and manufacturing processes.
The chart to the right shows the point at which the use of gas boilers
becomes more carbon intensive than producing the same amount of
heat using an average electric heat pumpb when considering the
projected rate of grid decarbonisation6.

A practical guide to electrification: For new buildings

05

Equivalent 100 year kgCO2/kWh for gas boiler

2050

2040

2030

2020

2060

Grid decarbonisation over time

The bubbles below show the cumulative GHG emissions generated
for an average heat pump and gas boiler in different statesc over 25
years based on producing 1MWh of heat per year.

In buildings this means eliminating natural gas. Of the available
alternatives to natural gas, including hydrogen biofuels, electrification
is supported as the preferred path for buildings by the IPCC and the
International Energy Agency (IEA)4. The Australian Government’s
Net Zero Strategy ‘Australia’s Long Term Emissions Reduction Plan’5
also highlights electrification as a key technology available now for
decarbonisation. NABES benchmarks will be regularly updated to
use the latest electricity grid emission factors. As the grid
decarbonises this will favour electrification as a means of improving
ratings.

It is clear, electrification is a critical pathway on
the decarbonisation journey to net zero buildings
and precincts.

Equivalent 20 year kgCO2/kWh for gas boiler

b Assuming a heat

pump with an average
coefficient of
performance of 3 and
a gas boiler with 90%
efficiency.

c different states have

different grid
coefficients. In
Australia, Victoria has
the most emission
intensive grid, with
South Australia one of
the cleanest.

6.0

2.2

1.7

0.6

Gas boiler
(100 year
GWP)

Heat
pump in
VIC - grid
electricity

Heat pump in
NSW - grid
electricity

Heat pump
in SA - grid
electricity

Heat pump
with 100%
renewables

What these charts outline is that any building
being designed today that uses gas can emit far
more than any well designed all-electric building
even if this building did not procure renewables.
When paired with on-site or off-site renewables,
the GHG savings are even greater.

A practical guide to electrification: For new buildings

06

The case for
electrification
– investor
benefits

Green, social, and sustainable bonds, green and sustainabilitylinked loans, and sustainability-linked bonds, resulted in global
sustainable debt capital surpassing US$700 billion in 20217, a 30%
increase compared to 2019.
Organisations such as the Clean Energy Finance Corporation
(CEFC) and Climate Bonds Initiative are helping unlock investment
capital to deliver enhanced sustainability performance.
With access to $10 billion to invest on behalf of the Australian
Government, the CEFC invests to address some of Australia’s
toughest emissions challenges. Its property-related investment
commitments include ‘demonstration’ projects with the ability to
deliver best-in-class emissions performance through the use of
renewable energy, energy efficiency and low emissions
technologies - across new and existing commercial, industrial and
residential buildings. A new CEFC program is seeking to
substantially cut construction-related embodied carbon emissions,
through the use of mass engineered timber as a greener alternative
to conventional construction materials.
The Climate Bonds Initiative is an international organisation that
works to mobilise the $100 trillion bond market for climate
solutions. Several green bonds issued in Australia and New
Zealand are financing low carbon commercial buildings. Recently,
the Initiative recognised8 Green Star’s Climate Positive Pathway as
an automatic compliance route due to its electrification
requirements and energy reduction targets.
Sustainability linked loans are finance instruments in which the
terms of the loan (like the interest rate) are linked to the borrower’s
environmental, social, and governance (ESG) performance. By late
2020 their global volume reached US$120 billion for the year7. An
Australian example, Charter Hall, entered9 into a $500 million loan
with targets aligned to NABERS and Green Star.
Recently, the EU Taxonomy10 for sustainable activities outlined how
finance streams should be directed to deliver a decarbonised
economy. While the guidance on the use of natural gas is limited, it
is clear that all-electric buildings that are highly energy efficient
comply with its requirements. This will help direct even more
investor interest to these assets.

A practical guide to electrification: For new buildings

07

The case for
electrification
– resilience
and risk
reduction

Buildings that are not resilient to climate change or responding to
changing regulatory and economic environments may end up as
stranded assets11. At the very least, they may be uncompetitive in a
sector that is rapidly responding to the climate change challenge.
The coming desirability for all-electric buildings is predictable. Over
the past several decades policies have been introduced that
resulted in buildings becoming more efficient. The Australian
Government’s own ‘Long Term Emissions Reduction Plan’ is
already highlighting electrification as a desirable outcome. Policies
to achieve this aren’t far behind.
In 2017, the Taskforce for Climate Related Financial Disclosures
recommended12 that Boards of Directors review and analyse the
potential for both physical risk and transition risk. Amongst the
many recommendations was the consideration of an asset
becoming a stranded asset due to its use of fossil fuels, its
increased costs due to the use of costlier fuel sources and
changing consumer habits and preferences for zero carbon.
Business leaders also have a financial responsibility to deliver
assets that are affordable and represent value for money over the
long-term. This includes being future-proofed for a changing
climate and the potential future costs associated with carbon
emissions. In 2020, 72% said they conduct a structured and formal
review of environmental, social and governance (ESG) disclosures
(up from 32% in 2018) while a further 25% evaluate non-financial
disclosure informally13.
Managing for the volatility of gas prices makes sense. Over the
period of 2010 to 2021, wholesale and retail gas prices have risen
significantly over the last 20 years14. Natural gas prices in Australia
are linked to global prices. These are subject to major shocks,
including geopolitical upheaval associated with the major gas
producers such as Russia. Decoupling the operating costs of
buildings from global politics is a key benefit of all-electric
buildings.
Finally, there is the question of future-proofing assets. Installing
natural gas system and infrastructure in new buildings will
unquestionably result in needing to upgrade the building well
ahead of its end-of-life. A typical gas boiler should last between 15
to 20 years without replacement. This means a building finished in
2025 would still have a working natural gas boiler in 2045. This is
not consistent with a zero carbon future and it may be valued
accordingly by the market.

A practical guide to electrification: For new buildings

08

The case for
electrification
– health and
safety benefits

While natural gas is cleaner burning than other fossil fuels, it still
produces a range of harmful pollutants including nitrogen dioxide,
carbon monoxide and fine, toxic particulate matter.
While extraction and production are closely regulated, spills, and
leaks of dangerous chemicals can occur and these can have
significant impacts on human health15. Air pollution from gas
processing, venting, and flaring can also impact air quality and
nearby communities16.
While those impacts seem far away, using natural gas in buildings
can directly impact the health and well being of occupants and
users17:
When gas cooktops are used, pollutants are introduced into
the kitchen. Good ventilation and modern exhaust fans can
reduce harmful indoor air pollution but can’t eliminate it.
Kitchens with gas cookers are also hotter to be in, as the
heat from gas combustion heats the kitchen as well as the
pans. This results in a less thermally comfortable
environment to be in.
Recent research18 has found that the effect of gas cooktops
in homes on childhood asthma is comparable to the impact
of passive smoking in the household.
Space and water heating with gas produces the similar pollutants.
These have less impact within buildings as they are mostly (but
not always) vented directly outside. While this mitigates the risk of
these pollutants in an indoor environment, the building still
contributes to the air pollution of our cities. Air pollution is an
ongoing concern and thought to contribute to the deaths of almost
5000 Australians each year19. As the transport sector – a key
contributor to urban air pollution – electrifies, emissions from gas
powered buildings will play a proportionally larger role.

From a health perspective, as a doctor and
mother, there's a double impact from gas.
Not only is it a major source of health pollution
in people’s homes, but it's also a fossil fuel.

The case for
electrification
– tenant and
consumer
preferences

Many organisations and governments have made clear public
commitments to GHG emissions reduction targets. Demonstrating
a commitment to keep global warming below 1.5ºC, and executing
on it, is now a competitive advantage.
The World Green Building Council’s (WorldGBC) Net Zero Carbon
Buildings Commitment (NZCBC) 20 aims to create a market for net
zero carbon buildings by 2030. As of September 2021, more than 30
organisations and governments from Australia have signed up.
The Science Based Targets Initiative21 and RE10022 (which requires
the use of 100% renewable energy by 2030) have hundreds of
global companies signed up to their programs.
A 6 Star Green Star Building23 rating requires fossil fuels to be
eliminated and all electricity from 100% renewables. This
requirement cascades down to 5 star ratings in 2024 and 4 star
ratings in 2027. Green Star is used by many ASX companies to
identify green buildings to lease or occupy.
Influential commercial chefs are waking up to the opportunity and
praising the benefits of induction equipment in their restaurants.
The benefits are many, from cleaner, safer kitchens, to more
comfortable environments to cook in. It turns out if you can’t stand
the heat in the kitchen, the best thing to do is to remove gas from it.
Consumers also want better options. ASBEC’s Roadmap for
Sustainable Homes24 notes that consumers are looking for green
and healthy homes and apartments. Health is a major concern, and
as awareness grows on the link between poor health outcomes and
cooking with gas, this impact and interest in all-electric homes will
grow. Consumers are also becoming more safety-minded, with
many noting gas stoves remain hot for some time after turning off
and pose a fire risk.
Consumer preferences will change as environmental and health
campaigns scale up. Already home renovation shows on TV are
praising the benefits of induction, and an upcoming global
campaign promoting its health benefits will likely change minds
further.

Dr. Kate Charlesworth, “Cooking with gas? Research finds health and
emissions risks even when stoves are off”, ABC news, 27 Jan 2022

A practical guide to electrification: For new buildings

09

A practical guide to electrification: For new buildings

10

Case study:
PHIVE,
5 Parramatta
Square
Location
Parramatta, NSW
Sector
Public & Community
Building
Developer
City of Parramatta
Council
Key electric features

Domestic
Hot water

Space
heating

Set to be the jewel in the crown of a transformed Parramatta Square,
5 Parramatta Square will become the permanent home of an
enhanced City of Parramatta Library, as well as a place for delivering
world-class community and cultural experiences.
Lead contractors, Built, won the project with a plan to make the
building 100% electric. Full electrification was not part of the original
reference design for the building but was a perfect fit for the City of
Parramatta’s net zero goals. The removal of natural gas as an energy
source along with a renewable electricity power purchase agreement
will make the operational energy of 5 Parramatta Square net zero
carbon from day one.

As part of their winning tender, Built redesigned
the reference building to optimise opportunities
for energy savings and remove the need for gas.
Features include:
A variable refrigerant flow system and rooftop condensers
instead of gas boilers and chillers. This removes the need for
gas and cooling towers. No cooling towers also means that
potable water consumption is reduced by 70%.
A mixed mode ventilation system which uses a combination of
natural ventilation from operable windows and mechanical
heating and cooling. An energy recovery ventilation heat
exchanger will pre-heat or pre-cool air coming in and out of the
building. These reduce the building’s HVAC energy by 35%.
The building management system is linked to the Bureau of
Meteorology and two local weather sensors to ensure optimal
operation of the mixed mode ventilation system and the energy
recovery ventilation system.
An electric domestic hot water system and thermal storage will
provide the hot water needed for the building’s end of trip
facilities and kitchenettes.
To reduce the energy demand for domestic hot water, a hot
water ring main delivery system was not included in Built’s
design. This means water will not be continuously heated and
pumped around the building. Instead, local electric units
generate hot water to taps that are rarely turned to hot.

For 5 Parramatta Square, we
saw opportunities to optimise
the building’s design to include
natural ventilation, reduce
energy demand and remove
the need for gas completely.
JOE KARTEN | Head of Sustainability and Social Impact, Built

A 13-kW photo voltaic system.
5 Parramatta Square is targeting a 6 Star Green Star – Design &
As Built certification and is due for completion by Easter 2022.

A practical guide to electrification: For new buildings

11

A practical guide to electrification: For new buildings

12

Case study:
Nightingale 1
Location
Melbourne, Vic
Sector
Multi-unit residential
Developer
Nightingale and
Breathe Architecture
Key electric features

Domestic
Hot water

Space
heating

Cooking

Encouraging people to make the switch to electric takes a shift
in mindset – which is why Nightingale Housing hosts “induction
inductions” to help homeowners understand the benefits of
cooking without gas.
Designed by Breathe in active collaboration with its future
residents, Nightingale 1 is carbon neutral in operation and fossil
fuel free – which means no gas.
The 20-apartment building, which opened in 2017, boasts an 8.2
Star NatHERS average rating, which is around 200% higher than
compliance under the National Construction Code.
The first step towards a 100% electric building is to reduce
energy demand through good design. Nightingale 1’s design –
with high thermal insulation, a tight thermal envelope, passive
ventilation and solar shading – eliminates the need for airconditioning. Space heating is provided by heat pumps
connected to hydronic heating.
The next step to electrification is to secure an affordable supply
of renewable energy. The building’s roof has an 18kW solar array,
and the body corporate’s embedded network supplies residents
with 100% certified green power at wholesale rates. Nightingale 1
residents pay less for green power than most people pay for
stranded (black) electricity.
Bonnie Herring, Breathe’s Director of Architecture and
Sustainability Lead, says Nightingale 1 was developed with “no
gas, no question”. Hydronic heating provides a “much more
pleasant, radiant heat” than reverse cycle air-conditioning while
induction cooktops are a “super-efficient technology”.
Bonnie says the induction inductions, undertaken with the help
of home appliances manufacturer Fisher & Paykel, help to “end
the romance with gas”.
“The inductions are a fun way to get residents excited about their
cooktop and to help them understand how to manage the easyto-control heat.” A professional chef is invited into the resident
host’s home to share the secrets to induction, with neighbours
also gathered to watch the demonstration and feast on the
results.
Induction cooking is faster and up to 95% more efficient than
gas, where as much as two-thirds of the energy is lost in heating
the kitchen. “Induction cooktops are also up to 40% more
efficient than ceramic cooktops as they only heat the pan and
not the surrounding air or the cooktop's surface,” Bonnie says.

A practical guide to electrification: For new buildings

13

Image credit: Kate Longley, Breathe Architecture

People can sometimes take an
all-electric building for granted.
The induction inductions are
community-building events that
help residents understand the
value of going all-electric.
BONNIE HERRING | Director of Architecture and Sustainability Lead,
Breathe Architecture

A practical guide to electrification: For new buildings

14

Case study:
ACT
Government
Office

When the Doma Group won a design competition to build the
new ACT Government Office Building in Canberra, full
electrification was not part of the specification. But, when
asked by the tenant if it was possible, they took on the
challenge and delivered an all-electric building with a 5 Star
NABERS rating.

Location
Canberra, ACT

The cold, Canberra winter mornings, and hot summer days
posed a real challenge. However, Doma embraced the
opportunity and worked closely with consultants to understand
and overcome the challenges and manage the risks.

Sector
Commercial office
Developer
DOMA Group
Key electric features
Image credit: Peter Clarke

Case study:
Gillies Hall
Location
Mornington Peninsula,
Vic
Sector
Student accommodation
Developer
Monash University
Key electric features

Domestic
Hot water

Space
heating

The property team at Monash University knew that a highperformance fabric for Gillies Hall, an accommodation facility at
the university’s Morning Peninsula campus, would reduce the
building’s heating and cooling energy requirements, removing the
need for gas.
Concept designs noted that using gas could make the building
cheaper to build, but Monash University was firmly committed to
an all-electric facility. The alignment with their net zero carbon
commitment and the need to demonstrate the elimination of fossil
fuels in multi-residential buildings was too important to ignore.
Ultimately, the fabric-first approach, a high-performance façade
and an ERV heat exchanger which does a small amount of precooling or pre-heating of air entering the building, have made this
a very comfortable place to live, study and socialise.

Domestic
Hot water

Space
heating

"There were 12 iterations of the design," says David Jameson,
Senior Development Manager at Doma Group. "The changes
we needed to make to the physical footprint of the plant room
were significant. We also needed our tenant for the café on the
ground floor to get on board with an electric kitchen."
The solution ended up being a combination of electric watercooled and air-cooled heat pump chillers. The optimised chiller
plant arrangement became a real asset, with their capacity to
shift and provide both cooling and heating, deal with part load
operation while managing peaks in summer and winter.
The building was completed in 2020 and energy performance
is better than expected, though COVID-19 restrictions in the
ACT have meant that there has not yet been the consistent
occupancy needed to finalise a NABERS rating.

Cooking

Gillies Hall, completed in 2019, is the third of five all-electric
buildings that Monash University has developed. “We are learning
more with each project and the market is moving, too,” says Dr
Rob Brimblecombe, Manager, Engineering & Sustainability at
Monash. “We still needed to convince a few people that allelectric was the way to go, and some of the equipment had to be
sourced from overseas, but the barriers were smaller and fewer
than our first electric project. For our most recent all-electric
project, the Woodside Building for Technology and Design, it’s
exciting that we were able to source most of the equipment in
Australia and all of the consultants and project stakeholders were
on board with electrification from the start.”

Cooking
A practical guide to electrification: For new buildings

15

A practical guide to electrification: For new buildings

16

Case study:
Burwood
Brickworks
Location
Burwood, Vic
Sector
Retail centre
Developer
Frasers Property
Key electric features

Frasers Property Australia set its sights high when developing Burwood
Brickworks, a shopping centre in the 6 Star Green Star – Communities
certified Burwood Brickworks precinct. The building itself is the most
sustainable retail centre in the world having achieved Living Building
Challenge® Petal Certification and aiming for a 6 Star Green Star –
Design & As Built rating. These certification goals, and Frasers Property
Australia’s commitment to sustainability, drove the decision to target full
electrification for the centre.
Frasers Property Australia has worked closely with tenants, particularly
food and hospitality businesses, to understand and try to overcome
some of the barriers. During feasibility, several anchor tenants were
confirmed and were supportive of the goal.
“The big retailers are big influencers in their own supply chain. They
were able to specify to their suppliers that they would need equipment
for their stores that were electricity-ready rather than gas,” says Stephen
Choi, Living Building Challenge Manager, Frasers Property Australia.

Domestic
Hot water

Space
heating

Cooking

Electric
vehicles

“For smaller operators, this has been more challenging. Electric
equipment – particularly for commercial cooking – can be more
expensive to purchase or less available than traditional gas-powered
equipment.”
But improved efficiency of electric appliances, air quality and safety won
many over. Access to electricity at a lower price than is offered by the
big three energy retailers through the building’s embedded energy
network also helped.

For some tenants, the lack of gas
has been a deal-breaker and that is
something we need to address
collectively across industries – from
development level to supply chains.
Governments have a role to play by
setting a clear pathway for a
transition to clean energy, including
making it equitable for the various
retail typologies, whether a shop is
on a high street or in a retail centre.
STEPHEN CHOI | Living Building Challenge Manager,
Frasers Property Australia

A practical guide to electrification: For new buildings

17

A key element to Burwood Brickworks success was its early
engagement with tenants to deliver all-electric outcomes.
There are many opportunities to influence tenants to join you on the journey to be part of an
all-electric building.
Engage early with your major tenants
Key to this project’s success was the early engagement with their anchor tenants, with the
majors. The engagement was important – all-electric cooking systems require changes to
their equipment, and can require more substantial electrical infrastructure provision. By
having them commit early to this goal, they will have more time to adjust and adapt.
Provide incentives to tenants or occupants to switch
The decision to electrify the building may result in tenants or occupants having to pay more
for the relevant equipment. While major tenants may be able to absorb the upfront costs,
smaller tenants may need assistance to be able to procure that equipment. Incentives to help
with this procurement may be necessary until this equipment becomes more common and
lower cost.
If a project establishes that gas will not be permitted for heating or hot water, then bringing
gas into a space or a specific building becomes both a capital cost and an ongoing additional
cost further deterring tenants from wanting gas.
Partner with equipment manufacturers to deliver all-electric equipment
Until all-electric equipment, particularly induction cooktops, becomes more common, there
will be a need to inform tenants and occupants on the benefit of this equipment, and to assist
in training them. Equipment manufacturers can provide training and help deliver
relevant marketing material.

A practical guide to electrification: For new buildings

18

Restaurants and
chefs recognise
the value of
induction
cooking

Image credit: Kate Longley, Breathe Architecture

Stokehouse chef Jason Staudt welcomes the
shift saying "the combination of cooking over
wood, with the cleanliness and sustainability of
induction is absolutely the future".
"As much as I love gas, induction has advanced
in so many ways. It's more powerful, the
cleaning is easier, and the cooking is more
accurate.”
JASON STAUDT Chef, Stokehouse, ‘No longer cooking with
gas: how a shift to induction cooking could affect Victorian
homes and restaurants’, Good Food Online, May 11, 2021

We use induction cooktops in the kitchens at Rockpool Bar & Grill, Spice
Temple and Rosetta," he says. "They're far easier to clean down after use,
which is one of the main reasons we chose induction over gas. With
induction you're no longer a slave to an incredibly dirty gas stove top with
multiple fittings that have to cool down and be dismantled ahead of
cleaning. There is far more elbow grease involved when cleaning a gas top.”
NEIL PERRY | Chef, ‘Gas v induction cooktops’ what is your pick? Good Food Online,
May 3, 2017

A practical guide to electrification: For new buildings

19

Image credit: Kate Longley, Breathe Architecture

Greater energy efficiency means kitchens save money not only on the
cost of fuel, but on airconditioning too. For Wakuda, the higher costs of
installation have been offset by the “lower cost of ownership. We have
a safer, cooler, more energy efficient kitchen,” he says.
TETSUYA WAKUDA | Chef, Tetsuya, ‘Electric currents’, Restaurant & catering,
December 13, 2016

“If I had the choice, all of our
restaurants would be
induction only, there's no
difference in the quality of
food you can produce.
Unfortunately, many of the
buildings our restaurants sit in
did not have the foundations
for induction cooking because
they're so old.”

“It [induction cooking] is a new
thing for me, but the idea is to
have an ambient kitchen.”
says chef, Martin Benn. “Gas
stoves makes the kitchen go
really hot, but we want to have
more of an ambient 24C so
the chefs aren’t too hot when
cooking and the food stays at
the right temperature.”

NATHAN TOLEMAN | CEO, Mulberry
Group, ‘No longer cooking with gas:
how a shift to induction cooking could
affect Victorian homes & restaurants’,
Good Food Online, May 11, 2021

MARTIN BENN | Chef, Society, ‘Cooking
up a dream kitchen: Martin Benn’s
Society restaurant in Melbourne’, The
Australian,
May 7, 2021

A practical guide to electrification: For new buildings

20

How to electrify
a building:
Alternatives
to natural gas

Space heating

Domestic hot water

Gas

Alternative

Gas

Alternative

Gas boiler (central)

• Heat pumps
• Reverse cycle air conditioning

Gas boiler
(central)

• Heat pumps with thermal storage tanks

Gas radiant

• Electric radiant

Gas boiler (local)

Gas ducted / fire /
heater

• All of the above

• Instantaneous electric
• Heat pump

Impacts and benefits

Impacts and benefits
Space
Capital costs
Energy costs

• Larger plant room needed
• Natural ventilation needed
• Higher initial investment
• Lower operating costs

Space

• Larger plant room needed
• Natural ventilation needed

Capital costs

• Higher initial investment

Energy costs

• Lower operating costs

Health

• No air pollutants
• Zero (with renewables)

Health

• No air pollutants

GHG emissions

GHG emissions

• Zero (with renewables)

Technical considerations

Technical considerations
Replacing gas boilers with heat pumps opens up opportunities for
efficiencies through integrated system design (see here).

Opportunity
Using lower temperature heating means that you can recover heat
from chiller condenser water prior to its rejection to cooling towers
during periods when the building may need heating in some areas
and cooling in others. Heat pumps can also be used for both heating
and cooling, whereas gas is used for heating only. Sydney Opera
House has used condenser water from sea water chillers to provide
space heating for over 40 years.
In buildings with very low demand for space heating, it may be more
effective to use direct electric systems instead of heat pumps.

A practical guide to electrification: For new buildings

21

Gas boilers are often sized to meet the peak hot water demand. A like
for like capacity replacement with heat pumps would lead to more
space needed and a higher peak electricity demand. To avoid this,
heat pumps can be designed to meet the daily demand with storage
tanks to manage the peak hourly demand. Regardless, heat pumps
will still require additional space in the plant room (see here).
Thermal storage pre-heat tanks connected to the condenser water
loop can also help capture waste heat from chillers before rejection to
cooling towers.

Opportunity
Storage tanks can be designed to act as a thermal battery allowing
heat pump operation to be optimised to match on-site renewable
electricity peak generation, or as part of an electrical demand
management system.

A practical guide to electrification: For new buildings

22

How to electrify
a building:
Alternatives
to natural gas

Commercial cooking

Domestic cooking

Gas

Alternative

Gas

Alternative

Gas cooktop

• Induction

Gas cooktop

•

Induction

Flame &
char

• Electric charcoal grille
• Portable green hydrogen cooktop
• Electric grille with steam for moisture

Gas oven

•

Electric oven

Gas BBQ

•

Electric or charcoal BBQ

Wok burner

• Induction wok burner

Gas oven

• Electric oven
• Electric steam oven

Impacts and benefits

Impacts and benefits
Space

• Smaller extract ducts
• Smaller kitchen possible

Capital costs

• Higher initial investment

Energy costs

• Similar

Health

• Better indoor air quality & more comfortable
temperature

GHG Emissions

• Zero (with renewables)

Considerations
Alternative electric approaches exist for cooking styles that need
flame. When needed, localised fuel sources, preferably using a
renewable biofuel or biogas, can be used. Discussing with potential
retail tenants and agents early the benefits of all electric kitchens, can
help lessen concerns as the industry transitions over the next few
years (see here).

Opportunity
Commercial kitchens and retail food and beverage use some gas for
cooking. This is changing as the many benefits of all electric kitchens
become apparent. Chefs are now training to use all-electric
equipment and changing cooking techniques to suit. Those that do
are finding all electric kitchens provide a safer, healthier, and more
productive kitchen.

A practical guide to electrification: For new buildings

23

Space

• No change (induction cooktop can provide
extra workspace)

Capital costs

• Higher initial investment

Energy costs

• Similar

Health

• Better indoor air quality
• Reduced risk of burns

GHG Emissions

• Zero (with renewables)

Opportunity
Over the past 20 years cooking with gas has been marketed as a
sales feature for houses and apartments. Sales agents for developers
have typically been reluctant to only provide induction cooktops in
new development citing customer expectations for gas. This has been
a major barrier to removing gas, even with developers committed to
net zero carbon by 2030. The risk of losing out on potential sales due
to not having a gas cooktop can override corporate zero carbon
commitments. This attitude is changing.
Instead of fearing change, sales agents and developers can sell the
many benefits of modern induction cooking to purchasers: precise
temperature control, no hot surfaces (safer), easier to clean and no
indoor air pollution. A modern home shouldn't feature 100 year old
technologies as a major selling point! (see here).

A practical guide to electrification: For new buildings

24

How to electrify a building: Backup power and other uses
Backup and emergency power
a building:
Backup power
and other uses Many buildings have diesel generators for emergency power during

Electric vehicles
Transport is undergoing a major transformation towards electric
technology. Consumer demand for electric vehicles (EVs) is
increasing, with battery electric and plug in hybrid vehicles
projected to make up 50% of new light vehicle sales in New South
Wales25 and Queensland26 by 2030. State and Federal27
governments are taking action to support investment and uptake of
low emission vehicles and the charging infrastructure.

electricity blackouts. While diesel consumption accounts for less than 1%
of the operating GHG emissions, over time it will need to be phased out
to deliver fully zero carbon buildings.
Some alternatives to diesel generators that could be considered are
outlined below. As it may be some time before these become
commercially viable, future proofing buildings for emerging technologies
is a prudent approach.

Biofuel generator

Battery Storage

There are long term storage issues
with replacing diesel with biodiesel.
Fuel tanks need to be designed for
biofuel. Higher blends of biofuel in
diesel will be developed over time.

Large battery storage solutions
in buildings will become more
viable in the future. They would
likely need to be used in
conjunction with other systems
as a power outage may not
occur when the batteries are
fully charged.

Hydrogen fuel cell
Hydrogen fuel cells generate electricity
and heat via a chemical reaction. Only
green hydrogen is zero carbon.

Other uses of natural
gas in buildings
There are a range of specialist uses in some buildings without a simple
alternative to fossil fuel use. In these cases, effort should be made to find
a replacement, or design the building for easy adaptability in the future.
Some examples are:

Steam in hospitals
Steam is used for sterilisation and typically generated by using gas.
Alternatives include dry heat, chemical, plasma gas and vaporised
hydrogen peroxide sterilisation.

Laboratory bunsen burners
Gas bunsen burners can be replaced with electric versions of portable
burners. While the latter use butane/propane/LPG, they are easier to
replace in the future with green fuel sources.

Industrial processes
While outside the scope of this guide, green hydrogen will be an
important energy source to decarbonise industrial processes with high
heating requirements such as steel production.
A practical guide to electrification: For new buildings

25

Considerations
New buildings should be designed for the additional electrical
loads and space requirements needed to accommodate the
expected uptake of electric vehicles.

The critical
step – pairing
electric
buildings with
renewable
energy

All-electric buildings provide a simple way to be powered by 100%
renewables using electricity generated either on-site or off-site.
Every state and territory in Australia has established net zero
carbon by 2050 targets, which is likely to result in electricity grids
decarbonising at a much greater rate than has occurred to date
(see page 6). The closure of coal fired power stations, together with
the increasing investment in solar and wind power, will be the
primary drivers of this transition.
While it is difficult to predict the exact rate of grid decarbonisation
due to increased renewable penetration, individual building owners
and tenants can already purchase 100% renewable electricity
including through Power Purchase Agreements (PPAs) and
certified GreenPower.
While there are some rules that need to be followed, procuring offsite renewables is becoming easier and cheaper. Green Star 28, and
NABERS 29 both recognise the purchase of renewables as options
to reduce or eliminate GHG emissions. The NABERS Renewable
Energy Indicator30 will bring additional transparency to the
purchase of renewables.
There are also other potential opportunities if renewables are
installed on-site. Through a building’s embedded network, the
building owner may be able to offer renewable electricity to
occupants, creating an opportunity to also generate revenue.

A practical guide to electrification: For new buildings

26

Design considerations in all-electric buildings
Designing an all-electric
building involves careful
consideration of how to
integrate the systems and
find opportunities for
efficiencies.

Heat pumps
and thermal
storage

Gas
boilers
and flue

Local or central hot water systems

2

In buildings with low distributed demand for
domestic hot water, local electric point of use
heaters can be considered. Local systems can
result in an increase in peak electrical
demand compared to a central system. When
evaluating the cost-benefits also consider the
energy efficiency of heat generation, pumping
energy, pipework and standing losses, and
peak electrical demand.

Gas
pipework
and riser

Cold
water

Cold
water
Substation and
main switchboard

Gas meter
room

1
Connection
to gas grid

Connection
to electricity
grid

1

Substation considerations
and peak demand

2

Localised
heating

An all-electric plant room in detail

Depending on space heating, domestic hot water,
and cooking demand, the substation size may
need to be increased.

Integrated
systems

All-electric buildings can be designed to take advantage of the lower heating
hot water temperatures required for heat pumps. The diagram to the right
illustrates one potential configuration for heat recovery from chillers.

In most climates in Australia, the peak demand for
cooling will be higher than the peak demand for
heating. But in colder climates where heating
demand exceeds cooling demand then there may
be a need to consider how to manage the
building’s peak heating loads.

Plant size

In general, electric equipment (heat pumps and storage) needs three to five
times more space than gas equipment for the same amount of heat. Good
cross ventilation is also required unless ground source heat pumps are used.

Thermal storage tanks can be used to reduce
peak load and increase resilience. Storage tanks
can also act as a thermal battery allowing heat
pump operation to be optimised to match on-site
renewable electricity peak generation, take
advantage of lower off-peak electricity tariffs, and
form part of an electrical demand management
system.

Central heat
pumps

Equipment and considerations in
an all-electric building

Gas equipment in a typical building
The items in red are not needed in an all-electric building

Mains water
15ºC

Pre-heat
storage
tanks
35 to 41ºC

Space
heating

Replacing gas boilers with heat pumps means keeping the heating hot water
temperature to around 41°C. This typically requires slightly larger heating coils
in air handling units for the heat transfer.

Heat
pumps

Domestic
hot water

Domestic hot water typically needs to be stored at 65°C to avoid legionella
risk. This reduces the efficiency of heat pumps used for domestic hot water
compared to space heating. To reduce the number of heat pumps required,
heat pumps are designed to meet the daily demand supported by storage
tanks to help with the peak hourly demand. Thermal storage pre-heat tanks
can also be used to capture waste heat from chillers and/or water sourced
VRF systems.

Storage
tanks

A practical guide to electrification: For new buildings

27

Cooling tower
/ heat rejection

65ºC

41ºC

Heat pumps

Heat Exchanger

41ºC

Domestic hot water

35ºC

35ºC

Chiller

5.5ºC

Heating

A practical guide to electrification: For new buildings

13ºC

Cooling

28

Carbon

Operating
Operating

Capital
Capital

Key cost and savings implications
Area

Gas requirement

Electric requirement

Heat generation
equipment 1

Gas boilers

Heat pumps and thermal storage

$$

The cost of heat pumps (plus storage tanks for DHW) will be higher than gas boilers. The cost of heat pump systems are likely to decrease as
they become more widely used.

Plant room
space

Boilers can be located
internally or externally

Heat pumps can be located
inside or outside. Good
ventilation is required for air
source heat pumps.

$

Heat pump systems typically require three to five times more floor area than gas boiler systems. The cost of this floor area depends on its
location in the building with roof plant likely to have the least cost impact. For internal plant rooms, natural cross ventilation will be required
which will influence the configuration and location of the plant rooms, and the design of the plant room façade (e.g. louvres).

Risers and
reticulation

Gas risers, pipework, submeters and exhaust flues

Standard electrical infrastructure
and risers. (already provided)

$

In addition to cost savings from removing the gas pipework, there are potential space savings due to eliminating risers, flues and metering.

Energy supply
infrastructure

Gas meter room and
connection to gas grid (or
LPG tanks)

Substation and main
switchboard (already provided)

V

Depending on the system size, there may be costs to increase the capacity of the main switchboard or substation. Costs for installing gas
infrastructure are frequently paid as capital contributions to network owners, in addition to the actual metering and billing charges.

Supply charge

Daily supply charge for
gas

No change to supply charge to
provide electricity to the
building

$

Daily supply charges for gas can be 20% to 40% of the total gas bill depending on usage.

Peak demand
charges

-

Potential increase in peak
demand consumption charges

$

For domestic hot water, there is potentially a small increase in peak demand charges, which can be mitigated through demand management
control and thermal storage. For space heating, the heat pumps typically have lower demand than the cooling system (chillers) and therefore
do not typically increase the peak electrical demand.

Consumption
charges 2

-

-

$

In 2020 a well-designed heat pump system should have lower energy consumption costs than a gas system. However, this all depends on
time of use and the tariffs negotiated by the building owner/operator. Predicting future energy costs for gas and electricity is notoriously
difficult. Various projections can be used to test the different cost differentials between the two.

Cost for carbon
neutral3

$20 to $50 per tCO2
for Australian naturebased carbon offsets
in 2021.

Renewable electricity
procurement

$

Offsetting natural gas is not a zero carbon solution as it is an emission source that can and should be eliminated. The true cost of carbon
abatement is projected to increase significantly this decade, and the cost of offsets will follow this trend. In comparison, the increased cost of
renewable electricity, if purchased via a large Power Purchase Agreement (PPA) can be marginal compared to conventional electricity tariffs.
Renewable electricity is projected to become cheaper over time compared to the costs of offsetting.

Legend

Cost/Savings Commentary

Notes
1.

$

< 5% in savings

$

< 5% in cost

$$

5% to 15% in cost

V

Depends on circumstance

Expected life of a heat pump is between 10 to 15 years, and a boiler is 15 to 20 years. Net present value costing,
including expected life and replacement, will depend on many variables and assumptions used in the whole-of-life
cost model.

2. Comparing consumption charges requires consideration of time of use and the purchasing power of the organisation.
Heat pumps and thermal storage can be used to take advantage of cheap electricity generated from renewables
during the daytime.
3. Another aspect to consider is the cost to convert a gas boiler system to heat pumps in the future as the demand for
zero carbon, fossil fuel free buildings increases. This cost should be considered in risk assessment and life-cycle
costing scenarios.

A practical guide to electrification: For new buildings

29

A practical guide to electrification: For new buildings

30

Commercial kitchens
From wok cookers to griddles, the range of induction equipment available has increased significantly in recent years as has their popularity.
Induction cooktops have flat surfaces that can be used as extra workspace for food preparation when not being used for cooking. They are
significantly easier and quicker to clean than gas burners with less cleaning chemicals required. They don’t get hot and can be wiped down
immediately – this means less time to clean the kitchen at the end of a shift. Induction cooktops can also be used for multiple types of cooking
due to the ability to control to set temperatures, reducing the amount of specialist equipment required which can deliver space and cost savings.
Induction cooktops save energy. Compared to gas burners, which are regularly left on during cooking, when a pan is lifted off the induction
surface the electricity consumption stops. Induction cooktops, by turning the pan itself into the heat source, also emit much less direct heat into
a kitchen which can reduce the size, space requirements and energy consumption of kitchen ventilation and space cooling systems.

Single-phase induction
oven range

Griddle/chargrill

Deep fryers

Cooktops

The quality, speed, heat and benefits are now equivalent or better than gas options. However, the upfront costs can be higher. A report from
North Sydney CouncilD analysed a potential transformation of the North Spoon Café from gas to all-electric. The information below summarises
the findings of equipment and operating costs. The bottom line? Any increased capital costs are paid back in a few short years.

Induction wok cooker
range

Issues

Power
rating

Cooking
efficiency

Heating /
preheat time

Annual energy
consumption

Estimated annual
energy use reduction

Annual cooking
energy cost

Product
cost

Gas
burner
w/ oven

• Hard to clean
• Fire risk
• Adequate ventilation
needed

150 MJ/h

53%

5 min 49 sec
(0.5L water)

120,598 MJ

-

$2,641

$3,199

Induction
w/ oven

• Easy to clean
• Reduced burn risk
• No fumes released

45 MJ/h

90%

3 min 35 sec
(0.5L water)

36,035 MJ

59%

$789

$6,500

Gas

• Hard to clean

60 MJ/h

50%

14 min
(to 190ºC)

68,913 MJ

-

$1,509

$3,220

Commercial induction
range cooker

Payback
period

2

years

0

years

Induction

• Easy to clean
• Food is evenly cooked
• More visually appealing

25.5 MJ/h
(2 units)

90%

8 min 34 sec
(to 190ºC)

29,288 MJ

58%

$641

$2,000

Gas

• Hard to clean
• Fire risk
• Adequate ventilation
needed

114 MJ/h

22%

-

120,598 MJ

-

$2,641

$4,789

Induction

• Easy to clean
• Evenly cooked food
• Reduced burn risk
• No fumes released

3

years
25.2 MJ/h

76%

-

26,658 MJ

78%

$584

$10,970

D With thanks to North Sydney Council for allowing us to use this information. The report will be published later this year.

A practical guide to electrification: For new buildings

31

A practical guide to electrification: For new buildings

32

Considering costs and benefits
The comparison of an all-electric building to a building using natural gas should take into account a range of whole-of-life factors. It should also take into account the critical environmental costs and benefits, value
impacts over time, and other opportunities. While it is difficult to assign specific costs and benefits for all buildings in a guide, the items below help ensure the most relevant issues are considered.

A

Infrastructure costs in a typical building
A building with natural gas requires equipment and
infrastructure which is not needed in an all-electric
building:

1

Infrastructure costs in an all-electric
building

Additional plant room area and louvres for ventilation
in internal plant rooms.

Gas risers.

Potential increase in electrical infrastructure capacity
including the substation.

Energy and carbon costs
Gas standing charges.

2

A building with gas is encumbering the building owner with
future conversion costs. These costs include:
Increased carbon offset costs over time.

5

Resilience, regulatory, and market benefits
All-electric buildings:
Will not require future upgrades to remove fossil fuel
infrastructure.
No gas equipment maintenance trades required.
Will be more attractive to investors with zero carbon
targets/goals.

Electricity consumption costs (including time of use).

Other impacts

Support building owners and tenants and reporting
(including TCFD) to meet their net zero carbon
commitments.

In the transition to all-electric buildings, other impacts to
consider include:

Meet the trajectories set by Green Star around energy
source and are future-proofed as NABERS Energy
changes to reflect the climate impact of fossil fuel use.

Cost of renewable electricity (for zero carbon).

3

Retail and commercial tenant awareness on the
benefits of all-electric commercial equipment. The
smaller kitchen may mean more front of house space.

Future replacement of gas systems including cost to
upgrade electrical infrastructure, increase plantroom
areas, and replace any heating systems not designed
for lower temperature heating hot water.

6

GHG emissions due to refrigerant leakage from heat
pumps (and any carbon offsets to be purchased).

Management costs from multiple energy contracting
and sources.

D

With renewable electricity, no emissions due to
electricity.

Electricity demand charges.

Carbon offsets (for carbon neutral).

Lifecycle costs

No GHG emissions from natural gas.

Energy and carbon costs

Gas consumption costs.

C

All-electric buildings have the following benefits:

Electric heating (typically heat pumps) and electric
cooking (including induction cook tops).

Boilers, heaters, gas cooktops and local exhausts.

Typical costs include:

Environmental benefits

All-electric buildings need the following infrastructure:

Gas infrastructure, including pipework connection to
the gas grid and metering.

B

4

Health, wellbeing, and occupant satisfaction
All-electric buildings:
Contribute to cleaner air in our cities
Provide cleaner indoor air and safer spaces in
commercial and domestic kitchens

Some capital cost savings realised by landlords in
removing gas infrastructure to kitchens/F&B
tenancies may need to be passed on to the tenants to
help with their increased capital cost of purchasing
induction cooktops compared to gas cooktops.

Other impacts
Direct and indirect impacts that should also be considered
for gas in buildings include:

In retail settings, enables more cleaner, safer, cooler
and less cluttered kitchens.

Impact on occupant health.
Near term climate change impacts due to methane
over next 20 years.

When considering the business case:

Investor perceptions of a potential stranded asset.

For a typical building with gas, include:

Misalignment with corporate and tenant net zero
carbon commitments.

o

Costs from A + B

Misalignment with global and domestic frameworks
like Green Star, GRESB, and others, and reduced
performance in NABERS Energy over time.

o

Costs and impacts on the environment, brand and asset from D

o

Lifecycle costs from C

A practical guide to electrification: For new buildings

33

For an all-electric building, include
o

Costs from 1 + 2

o

Benefits from 4 + 5 + 6

o

Other impacts from 3

A practical guide to electrification: For new buildings

34

Your role in
electrification

Development

Everyone involved in the delivery of new buildings has a role to play
in the electrification of buildings.
It ideally starts with the project brief, but until the design is locked
in for construction there are always opportunities to switch a
design to be fossil fuel free.

Approvals

Design

Construction

Electricity
Utilities

Establish a policy to only invest in buildings that are zero
carbon and fossil fuel free. For existing buildings insist that a
zero carbon transition pathway is provided and implemented.

Developers

Set a policy for new buildings to be zero carbon and fossil fuel
free. If this is not possible yet, then ensure the design can easily
transition to be all-electric as soon as possible.

Authorities

Review policies and procedures to ensure they don't
encourage or mandate that natural gas has to be provided to
buildings or precincts.

Electricity
Utilities

Support building owners/developers and designers to deliver
all electric buildings, including measures for grid stability and
avoiding over-design of electrical capacity.

Professional
services

Design the buildings with all-electric systems and be familiar
with different design solutions and emerging technologies.
Advocate for zero carbon solutions.

Builders &
Trades

Challenge design assumptions that assume fossil fuels are
required. Prepare alternative all-electric solutions when
bidding.

Leasing &
Sales Agents

Engage with potential tenants and purchasers to advocate for
all-electric cooking solutions. Be prepared with evidence to
demonstrate the benefits.

Facilities
Manager

Ensure that the building is running to its maximum potential,
creating a comfortable environment and managing the peak
energy demands of the building.

Tenants &
Occupants

Ask for fossil fuel free solutions. For retail F&B look at the
benefits of switching to all-electric for cooking. Electrification is
consistent with the net zero carbon targets that many
corporates and governments have now committed to.

Owners

Promote the benefits of electric buildings, and seek to own new
electric buildings. Ensure any owned existing assets are
electrified as promptly as possible.

Operations

Professional
services

Facilities
Manager

Authorities

Builders &
Trades

Leasing agent

Easier

Investors

Owner

Developers

Investors

Stakeholders

Opportunity for electrification

Tenants

Harder

A practical guide to electrification: For new buildings

35

A practical guide to electrification: For new buildings

36

Marketing an
all-electric
building

Investors
An all-electric building is ready for the decarbonisation of the grid,
particularly if the building is also highly efficient and powered by
renewables. A building that achieves these is likely to be aligned with
the latest science and recommendations from the following
organisations:
The Intergovernmental Panel for Climate Change (IPCC)
International Energy Agency’s net zero roadmap (IEA)
Taskforce for Climate-related Financial Disclosures (TCFD)
This building would also likely be aligned with the requirements of the
Climate Bonds Initiative, particularly if it has also achieved a 6 star
Green Star Buildings rating.
The reason for this is simple – the building is less likely to become a
stranded asset as it features no fossil fuels and has the capacity to
draw its entire energy from renewable electricity generated in
Australia.

Corporate and government tenants
An all-electric building has many features that make it valuable for
corporate and government tenants. In addition to the above, and as
noted elsewhere in the guide, all electric-buildings:
Enable the tenants to use 100% renewable electricity, which is
the best mechanism they can use to meet their net zero carbon
targets. This also reduces their climate-related risks and supports
reporting on property emissions and transition strategies.
Are cleaner and better. They pollute our towns and cities less and
provide healthier and safer workspaces in kitchens.
Align with the expectations set by GBCA’s Climate Positive
Pathway for new buildings and meet the latest Green Star
Buildings requirements for energy sourcing (see here).

Marketing
all-electric
kitchens to
domestic
buyers and
retail tenants

Retail tenants
The new generation of all-electric kitchens deliver many benefits:
Commercial kitchens are often hot, noisy environments with
lots of activity and stress. Induction cooktops put much less
heat, noise and air pollutants into the kitchen than gas burners
helping create calmer, quieter and cooler workplaces for
kitchen workers.
Energy consumption is lower. When a pan is lifted from an
induction cooktop the energy consumption stops. Lower heat
means lower energy for ventilation and cooling of the kitchen.

A practical guide to electrification: For new buildings

37

Induction cooktops are also quicker to clean at the end of the
day. There is no waiting for cooktops to cool down then
scrubbing burners and lining with foil. Factor in the labour cost
savings when preparing a business case.
Induction cooktops can be used as extra workspace for food
preparation when not being used for cooking. They can also be
used for multiple types of cooking due to the ability to control to
set temperatures, reducing the need for specialist equipment.
Smaller back of house allows for more front of house space, so
there is an opportunity for more sales.
Retail and commercial electric kitchens will become standard over the
next 5 years as the market changes. It’s best to be ready for the change
and not have outdated infrastructure when a new building opens.

Domestic buyers and tenants
Cooking with gas has been marketed as a sales feature for houses and
apartments creating customer expectations for gas in the kitchen. But
consumer attitude is changing, providing an opportunity to capitalise
on the many benefits for induction cooking. Messages to consider
include:
Induction kitchens are healthier, safer, and give you more control.
Gas stovetops emit toxic, carcinogenic gases that can increase
asthma and respiratory illnesses similar to the impact of passive
smoking. Exhaust fans don’t get rid of all of these, so avoid the
problem altogether and use induction.
Ever wondered why your kitchen is so hot? Natural gas kitchens
heat the air, not just your food. Your new induction cooktop gives
you great control as all the heat goes where it should – your pan.
You’ll save money on bills as your induction cooktop is more
efficient.
Your induction cooktop is child safe as the surface of an
induction cooktop does not stay hot! No burning small hands on
the stove.
Your cooktop is also an extra flat surface that you can use to
prepare food on when not cooking, and cleaning it is a breeze.
You can cook anything on it. World-class chefs of all cuisines are
moving to all-electric kitchens. They can do it - so can you!

A practical guide to electrification: For new buildings

38

Green Star
and allelectric
buildings

NABERS and
all-electric
buildings

Launched by Green Building Council of Australia in 2003, Green
Star is an internationally recognised rating system setting the
standard for healthy, resilient, positive buildings and places. In
summary, Green Star aims to:
Reduce the impact of climate change

Energy

Enhance our health and quality of life

Water

Restore and protect our planet’s biodiversity and ecosystems

Waste

Drive resiliency in buildings, fitouts, and communities

Indoor environment

Contribute to market transformation and a sustainable
economy

A Climate
Positive Built
Environment

This helps building owners to understand their building’s actual
measured performance compared to other similar buildings,
providing a benchmark for progress.

Green Star Buildings, introduced in late 2020, aims to deliver healthy,
resilient, and positive places for people and nature, built responsibly,
and showcasing leadership. Key to the rating tool is delivering
buildings that meet or exceed what is required to meet a 1.5C
trajectory. To achieve this, Green Star Buildings introduced
requirements for new buildings be ‘Climate Positive’ which includes
being fossil fuel free with no natural gas for space heating, domestic
hot water and cooking.
To get a world-leading 6 Star rating, any new building or major
refurbishment must be fossil fuel free. For projects registering after
2023, this requirement will apply to 5 Star ratings and after 2026 to 4
Star ratings. The requirement also applies to any building that is
finished on or after 1 January 2030 irrespective of the year of
registration.
The requirement is part of Green Star Building’s Climate Positive
Pathway.

From 2020

NABERS is a simple, reliable sustainability rating for the built
environment. Like the efficiency star ratings that you get on your
fridge or washing machine, NABERS provides a rating from one to
six stars for buildings efficiency across:

onwards buildings
that seek this rating

From 2023

onwards buildings
that seek this rating

From 2026

onwards buildings
that seek this rating

Supporting
Australia’s net
zero transition

Emissions factors, also known as the National Greenhouse
Accounts (NGA) factors, are used in NABERS Energy ratings to
enable the comparison of the emissions associated with the use of
different energy sources. The emissions related to grid electricity
use have been falling year-on-year with the increased amount of
renewable energy in the grid.
To ensure that NABERS Energy ratings accurately reflect
the latest emissions related to different energy sources, NABERS
has updated the emissions factors used to calculate NABERS
Energy ratings for all building types in July 2021.
After the initial July 2021 update, the NGA factors will be reviewed
and updated periodically. NABERS will provide more details on the
frequency of review very soon.
To enable users to calculate the NABERS rating using the updated
NGA factors, a rating prediction tool is available on the NABERS
website. Users can predict future NABERS ratings using projected
emissions factors.
Based on these changes, all-electric buildings should be able to
achieve their desired rating.
From 2022, NABERS will introduce a Renewable Energy Indicator30,
which will transparently disclose the amount of renewable energy
used by a building. Only all electric buildings running on 100%
renewables will able to get 100% on the indicator.

will need to be
Climate Positive

will need to be
Climate Positive.

will need to be
Climate Positive.

A practical guide to electrification: For new buildings

39

A practical guide to electrification: For new buildings

40

National
Construction
Code –
Section J

The National Construction Code of Australia includes an energy
efficiency provisions in Section J. This requires buildings to achieve
energy use targets, which are demonstrated through either meeting
Deemed to Satisfy requirements or undertaking energy modelling. It is
primarily focused on the thermal performance of the building fabric
and the energy efficiency of building services.
The GHG benefit of heat pumps compared to gas boilers is not
considered, nor is the potential for future grid decarbonisation over
the life of the building included at the time of certification. The energy
modelling protocol uses a reference building compared to the actual
building, and due to the calculation methodology at the time of
writing, gas boilers can provide a less onerous pathway to compliance
in some states. This will change as the grid further decarbonises.

BASIX
(NSW only)

The Building Sustainability Index (BASIX) requirements apply to all
residential dwelling types and are part of the development application
process in NSW. All apartment buildings and homes must undertake a
BASIX assessment to get development approval.
BASIX is in currently undergoing a review to ensure that all-electric
buildings are better supported.

GRESB

GRESB is an investor-driven organisation committed to assessing the
ESG performance of real assets globally. More than 200 members, of
which nearly 60 are pension funds and their fiduciaries, use the
GRESB data in their investment management and engagement
process, with a clear goal to optimise the risk/return profile of their
investments.
GRESB has indicated over the past few years an interest in driving
better performing assets. GRESB have highlighted that driving assets
to net zero carbon is a key concern. All-electric buildings have a better
opportunity to perform in this space in the future.

Climate Bonds
Initiative

Climate Bonds Initiative (CBI) is an investor-focused not-for-profit,
working to mobilise global capital for climate action. It administers the
Climate Bonds Certification Scheme.
Recently, CBI approved two of the Green Building
Council of Australia’s rating tools as compliant with green bonds
certification under the Climate Bonds Standard. Green Star was
recognised because the rating system is driving highly efficient, fossil
fuel free buildings powered by renewables.

Science Based
Targets Initiative
(SBTI)

The Science Based Targets Initiative (SBTI) is a partnership between
the United Nations Global Compact, World Resources Institute (WRI)
and the World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF) and Climate Disclosure
Project (CDP). The SBTi call to action is one of the ‘We Mean
Business Coalition’ commitments.
SBTi has begun publishing guidance on net zero claims. Key to this
guidance is the need to decommission or not install fossil fuel
infrastructure. All-electric buildings are in line with this guidance.

A practical guide to electrification: For new buildings

41

A practical guide to electrification: For new buildings

42

Myths and
barriers

We interviewed many stakeholders. These
are answers to common questions we heard.

Using electricity isn’t
greener – we’re still
burning coal

The purpose of electrifying buildings is two-fold: enable
procurement of off-site renewables, and to ensure we aren’t
locking in fossil fuel infrastructure for decades to come. Consider
that electricity networks are decarbonising more rapidly than the
most optimistic projections. By 2030, 69% of the electricity market
is projected to be renewables – it doesn’t make sense to finish a
building in the next few years that will be using carbon intensive
fossil fuels for the next 20+ years.

What about green
gas and hydrogen?

Transforming the gas network and buildings to use green
hydrogen or biofuels is much more difficult than adding
renewables to the electricity grid. The current gas network would
need to be replaced to carry 100% hydrogen (or it would leak, as
the hydrogen molecules are smaller than methane), and every
building in the network would need to have its equipment
replaced prior to switching over to hydrogen.
Also consider that it takes three times31 as many renewables to
create green hydrogen as it does to power something with
electricity. It is not worth that effort to pipe it to buildings to
generate heat. Better to use hydrogen and biofuels for sectors that
cannot easily electrify, like manufacturing.

The technology
isn't sufficiently
mature

Heat pumps and induction equipment have been around for many
years, are technically robust and readily available. Induction
cooking is becoming increasingly common in Europe and Asia.
With the increase in demand the pace of innovation is only likely
to increase further.

The electrical
infrastructure
capacity isn't large
enough to
accommodate all
electric design

The increased electrical demand associated with switching from
natural gas will depend on the size, location, system design and
use of the building. It may have an impact on the substation size.

Tenants and home
owners only want
gas

As induction cooktops become more common, their benefits to
users and building occupants have become apparent – better
control, safer, easier to clean, less heat in space and better air
quality. As more people become familiar with induction the
perception that gas is the best way to cook will change.

For the national grid though, the electrification of all sectors will
drive the necessary expansion to accommodate buildings and
other sectors’ demand. In fact, buildings may serve as part of a
smarter national grid including demand management and energy
storage.

What about carbon
offsets?

Offsets should only be used after direct emissions reduction
measures have been considered, such as to address upfront
carbon emissions. Most net zero carbon standards will not allow
offsets for natural gas in new buildings. With increased demand,
the price of offsets can be expected to increase compared to the
cost of renewable electricity which is decreasing.

Electric cooking
isn’t as controllable
particularly in
commercial
kitchens

The cost of heating
with electric is more
than with gas

There are three factors to consider that affect costs: equipment
efficiency, connection fees, and running costs. Heat pumps are
significantly more efficient than gas boilers and heaters, making
electric options increasingly more competitive. While gas and
electricity prices can fluctuate, removing gas means that you are
avoiding connection costs. Finally, a well-designed electric system
can take advantage of lower electricity prices at different times of
day to heat water to be used at a later time.

Induction cooking is faster (up to 60% more efficient energy
transfer) and provides instant response to changes in controls.
There are far more choices becoming available as more
equipment comes to market, technologies evolve to meet
consumer expectations and training on how to adapt to different
equipment is provided. Leading chefs agree, with induction
cooktops used in their restaurants.

Induction woks are
not commercially
available in
Australia

Demand for high power induction woks for Asian cooking is
increasing in Australia. Many leading suppliers are looking at
options to import them from the UK and China to meet this
demand. As demand increases, so will availability.

We don't have the
for all electric design

Heat pumps typically take up more space than gas boilers in plant
rooms, but avoid the need for gas pipe reticulation, ventilated gas
risers and gas meter rooms. Early planning can mitigate these
impacts.
A practical guide to electrification: For new buildings

43

A practical guide to electrification: For new buildings

44

Legislation and
planning penalise
switching to all electric

The National Construction Code Section J energy model pathway
can result in a small penalty for switching to electricity if the
building isn’t designed to be efficient. A good design will avoid this
penalty. NatHERS does not penalise electric buildings at all.

Design rating tools
penalise switching to
all electric

Green Star Buildings (and its legacy versions) rewards making
buildings fossil fuel free. It is also mandatory for buildings
targeting 6 star and will be mandatory for buildings registering for
5 star after 2023 and 4 star after 2026. Future versions of Green
Star Communities and Interiors will adopt similar principles.

Operational /
performance rating
tools penalise all
electric buildings

Higher NABERS Energy ratings were, until 2021, harder to achieve
with electric heat pumps than with gas boilers. The recent revision
of the carbon coefficients for grid electricity will reduce this
impact. The regular update every 5 years will reflect the
decarbonisation of the electricity grids in each state and territory.
Green Star Performance will be updated in 2022 to include
requirements to be fossil fuel free for higher star ratings, with a
transitional approach adopted for existing assets.

I have to install natural
gas to my building –
it’s the law!

There are no blanket requirements in Australia to connect a
building to the natural gas network. The last jurisdiction, ACT,
removed this requirement from their planning legislation in 2019.
However, there are still some processes, such as in Victoria,
where a gas authority may request that a gas connection is a
condition of development approval. This is changing and may not
be a problem in the near future.

Should I build gas now
and convert later?

Designing an asset today, with the aim to convert in the future,
means providing the plant room areas required and the electrical
demand capacity. Once you've provided the future space and
capacity why would you still install gas?

A practical guide to electrification: For new buildings

45

A practical guide to electrification: For new buildings

46

Appendix: Valuable terminology
Carbon offset

Emission scopes

Terminology to use when making claims

A carbon offset refers to a mechanism that is used to compensate for
emissions that occur elsewhere. Australia’s Climate Active program has clear
rules as to what constitutes a valid offset. Offsets are considered a measure of
last resort – they should be used to address unavoidable emissions such as
Scope 3 emissions. Natural gas use in new buildings is not considered
unavoidable.
A mechanism for classifying different sources of greenhouse gas emissions
used in carbon accounting32. There are three ‘scopes’:
Scope 1 covers direct emissions from owned or controlled sources. In a
building this is typically emissions from burning fossil fuels (e.g. diesel,
natural gas and LPG) and leakage of fluorinated gases such as
refrigerants.
Scope 2 covers indirect emissions from the consumption of purchased
electricity, steam, heating and cooling.
Scope 3 covers activities not owned or controlled by the reporting
organisation. This includes production of fuels, electricity transmission
losses, embodied carbon in construction and maintenance (including
materials and products), tenant energy consumption, waste treatment,
water treatment and travel to/from the building.

GWP

Global Warming Potential (GWP) is a measure of the energy 1 tonne of a
greenhouse gas will absorb over 100 years compared to the emissions of 1
tonne of carbon dioxide (CO2). The GWP of CO2 is 1. GWP of natural gas is 21.

Heat pumps

A heat pump is an electrical device that provides heating or cooling
depending on which way the refrigerant flows around the system. There are
two types of heat pumps based on what the evaporator (heat source) and
condenser (heat delivery) are connected to.
‘Air source’ relies on outside air to heat the evaporator which transfers
heat to the condenser. Air source is commonly used across temperate
and warm climate zones in Australia.
‘Ground source’ uses water in pipes to transfer heat from the ground,
aquifers or water bodies to the heat pump condenser.

Hydrogen

Renewable energy

Hydrogen is a fuel that can be used to generate heat through combustion
(similar to gas) or used in fuel cells to create electricity through a chemical
process. There are three common ways to produce hydrogen fuel:
Green hydrogen, produced from renewable energy. It is the only form
of hydrogen that can be considered low carbon.
Blue hydrogen, produced from fossil fuels whose emissions have been
captured. This is untested technology at scale and lifecycle studies33
have shown it to be emissions intensive due to fugitive emissions.
Grey or brown hydrogen, produced from fossil fuels. Emissions
intensive and the most common type of hydrogen.
Renewable energy is any source of energy that can be used without depleting
its reserves including sunlight or solar energy, wind, wave, biomass, and
hydro energy. They are generally classified as on-site renewable energy
(where the generator is connected behind the meter), or off-site (where the
generator supplies to the grid and this electricity is procured). Off-site
procurement is a valid method of procuring renewables through a contract
that produces large generation certificates (LGC) that can be traced and have
been retired to the regulator. More information can be found here.
A practical guide to electrification: For new buildings

47

Net zero carbon
A net zero carbon building is one where there is a balance between the
amount of greenhouse gas produced and the amount removed from the
atmosphere on a net annual basis. It is a technical, though open-ended
term. Its use must be accompanied by the focus on emissions, e.g. net zero
in operations, net zero for construction, etc.
Net zero claims are often unverified, and there is no agreed standard that
defines them at this stage.

Carbon neutral
A carbon neutral building, as defined in the Australian Government’s
Climate Active standard34, is a building that:
Meets an energy consumption target
Measures water consumption and operational waste
Calculates its emissions based on the above information
Uses renewable energy and/or eligible carbon offsets to settle its
carbon account to zero.
Climate Active Carbon Neutral claims are third party verified.

Climate Positive
The Climate Positive pathway35 in Green Star Buildings requires buildings to:
Meet an energy consumption target
Meet an embodied carbon target
Be fossil fuel free for space heating, domestic hot water and cooking
Purchase 100% renewable electricity (scope 2 GHG)
Purchase nature based offsets* for refrigerants and defined scope 3
emissions
Green Star Climate Positive claims are verified by an independent third party
assessment process.
* - these have to be eligible under Climate Active, but are limited to nature based offsets or similar carbon
removal offsets. More information can be found here4.

A practical guide to electrification: For new buildings

48

Appendix:
References

1 IPCC, 2021: Climate Change 2021: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of

16 Retzer,K. et al (2018, August 24), Gases and vapors continue to pose hazards on oil

2 ASBEC. (2022). Rapid and Least Cost Decarbonisation of Building Operations

17 Kicking the gas habit: How gas is harming our health. Climate Council of Australia.

3 European Commission. (2021, November 2). Launch by United States, the European

18 Methane and NOx Emissions from Natural Gas Stoves, Cooktops, and Ovens in

4 IEA (2021), Net Zero by 2050, IEA, Paris https://www.iea.org/reports/net-zero-by-

19 Air pollution—what’s the situation?, (2019, July 19),

Working Group I to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change, https://www.ipcc.ch/assessment-report/ar6/

Discussion Paper. https://www.asbec.asn.au/wordpress/wpcontent/uploads/2022/02/ASBEC-Decarbonisation-Discussion-Paper-1.pdf

Union, and Partners of the Global Methane Pledge to Keep 1.5C Within Reach.
Retrieved January 28, 2022, from
https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/statement_21_5766

2050

5 Australian Government. (2021, October). Australia’s long term emissions reduction

plan. https://www.industry.gov.au/sites/default/files/October%202021/document/
australias-long-term-emissions-reduction-plan.pdf

6 Australian Government (2021, October), Australia’s emissions projections 2021,

https://www.industry.gov.au/sites/default/files/October%202021/document/austr
alias_emissions_projections_2021_0.pdf

7 McCarthy, A. (2021, August 30). Sustainability-Linked Debt Financing: The View

from Down Under. Sustainalytics.Com. Retrieved January 28, 2022, from
https://www.sustainalytics.com/esg-research/resource/corporate-esgblog/sustainability-linked-debt-financing-the-view-from-down-under

and gas well sites during gauging, fluid transfer, and disposal. NIOSH Science Blog
https://blogs.cdc.gov/niosh-science-blog/2018/08/24/oil-and-gas-vapors/

https://www.climatecouncil.org.au/wp-content/uploads/2021/05/Kicking-theGas-Habit-How-Gas-is-Harming-our-Health.pdf
Residential Homes, (2022) Eric D. Lebel, Colin J. Finnegan, Zutao Ouyang, and
Robert B. Jackson, Environmental Science & Technology,
https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.est.1c04707

https://www.science.org.au/curious/people-medicine/air-pollution-whatssituation

20 World Green Build Council. Webpage - The Net Zero Carbon Buildings

Commitment (2021) https://www.worldgbc.org/thecommitment

21 Companies taking action. (2021). Science Based Targets.

https://sciencebasedtargets.org/companies-taking-action

22 Members. (2021). RE100. https://www.there100.org/re100-members
23 GBCA’s Climate Positive Roadmaps for Buildings and Precincts (2021),

https://new.gbca.org.au/green-star/green-star-strategy/carbon-climate-change/

24 ASBEC. (2019). Growing the market for sustainable homes.

8 Climate Bonds Initiative recognises Green Star as a pathway to net zero buildings:

Two new proxies available for Certification under the Low Carbon Buildings
Criteria. (2021, November 25). Climate Bonds Initiative.
https://www.climatebonds.net/resources/press-releases/2021/11/climate-bondsinitiative-recognises-green-star-pathway-net-zero

9 Charter Hall funds $500 million sustainability-linked loan. (2021, November 22).

Corporate. https://www.charterhall.com.au/News/newsarticle/2021/11/22/charter-hall-funds-500-million-sustainability-linked-loan

10 EU taxonomy for sustainable activities. (2020, March 7). European Commission -

European Commission. https://ec.europa.eu/info/business-economyeuro/banking-and-finance/sustainable-finance/eu-taxonomy-sustainableactivities_en

https://www.asbec.asn.au/wordpress/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/190701ASBEC-CRCLCL-Growing-Market-for-Sustainable-Homes-web.pdf

25 NSW Electric Vehicle Strategy (2021), https://www.nsw.gov.au/initiative/nsw-

governments-electric-vehicle-strategy

26 Queensland’s Zero Emission Vehicle Strategy and Action Plan (2022),

https://www.publications.qld.gov.au/dataset/zeroemissisonvehiclestrategy

27 Future Fuels and Vehicles Strategy (2021), DISER, https://industry.gov.au
28 GBCA (2021), Green Star Buildings, https://new.gbca.org.au/green-star/rating-

system/buildings/#2

29 NABERS (2021), Supporting Australia’s net zero transition,

https://www.nabers.gov.au/about/news/supporting-australias-net-zero-transition

11 GBCA. (2021a). Future in focus: Resilience in the built environment.

30 NABERS (2021), Renewable Energy Indicator,

12 TCFD. (2017, June). Recommendations of the Task Force on Climate-related

31 IRENA (2020), Green Hydrogen: A guide to policy making,

https://www.nabers.gov.au/publications/nabers-release-renewable-energyindicator

https://new.gbca.org.au/green-star/green-star-strategy/resilience-builtenvironment
Financial Disclosures. https://assets.bbhub.io/company/sites/60/2021/10/FINAL2017-TCFD-Report.pdf

13 EY. (2020, July). How will ESG performance shape your future?

https://assets.ey.com/content/dam/ey-sites/eycom/en_gl/topics/assurance/assurance-pdfs/ey-global-institutional-investorsurvey-2020.pdf

32 As defined in the Greenhouse Gas Protocol. WRI, The Greenhouse Gas Protocol –

A Corporate Accounting and Reporting Standard (2015), https://ghgprotocol.org

33 Howarth, R. W. (2021, October 1). How green is blue hydrogen? Wiley Online

Library. https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1002/ese3.956

14 Australian Energy Regulator (2021), State of the energy market 2021,

https://www.aer.gov.au/system/files/State%20of%20the%20energy%20market%2
02021%20-%20Full%20report_1.pdf

15 Australian Government (2017) Human health risks associated with surface handling of

chemicals used in coal seam gas extraction in Australia.
https://www.awe.gov.au/water/coal-and-coal-seam-gas/publications/humanhealth-risks-of-chemicals-associated-with-csg-extraction-in-Australia

A practical guide to electrification: For new buildings

https://www.irena.org//media/Files/IRENA/Agency/Publication/2020/Nov/IRENA_Green_hydrogen_po
licy_2020.pdf

49

34 Climate Active. (2022). https://www.climateactive.org.au/
35 GBCA. (2021, November). Climate Positive Buildings and our Net Zero Ambitions.

https://new.gbca.org.au/green-star/green-star-strategy/carbon-climatechange/#net-zero-ambitions

A practical guide to electrification: For new buildings

50

Acknowledgements
GBCA would like to
acknowledge and
thank the following
organisations for
their contribution to
the delivery of this
guide.

AMP Capital

Monash University

Atelier Ten

Multiplex

Aurecon

NABERS

Better Buildings
Partnership

Northrop

Brain and Poulter
Breathe Architecture

Property Council of
Australia

Built

The Mack Group

Doma Group

WSP

North Sydney Council

Energy Efficiency Council
Frasers Property
Lendlease

Delivery team
Jorge Chapa – Head of Market Transformation
Taryn Cornell – Senior Manager Green Star Strategy &
Development
Rebecca Pettit – Technical Advisor
David Clark – Partner
Binaya Karki – Associate, Building Services
Erik Moore

Proudly funded by the NSW Government

GBCA would like to
thank our Climate
Positive Partners for
their ongoing
support.

A practical guide to electrification: For new buildings

51

A practical guide to electrification: For new buildings

