A practical guide to
electrification
For existing buildings

Established in 2002, Green Building Council of Australia (GBCA)
is the nation’s authority on sustainable buildings, communities
and cities. Our vision is for healthy, resilient and positive places
for people. Our purpose is to lead the sustainable transformation
of the built environment. GBCA represents more than 550
individual companies with a combined annual turnover of more
than $46 billion.
Technical partner

Cundall is a global, multi-disciplinary consultancy delivery
sustainable engineering design solutions and ESG, Zero Carbon,
and Existing Building advisory services across the built
environment. We have contributed to many leading green
buildings in Australia and across the world and continue to
engage with industry to help drive sustainable outcomes. Cundall
is a Carbon Neutral certified business global and is a founding
signatory of the World Green Building Council’s Net Zero Carbon
Building Commitment. Our Zero Carbon Design 2030 initiative is
to deliver zero carbon solutions on every project we do, with the
end goal that all our projects after 2030 will be zero carbon.

Funding partners

The CEFC is a specialist investor at the centre of efforts to help
deliver on Australia’s ambitions for a thriving, low emissions
future. With a strong investment track record, we are committed
to accelerating our transition to net zero emissions by 2050.
In addressing some of our toughest emissions challenges, we are
filling market gaps and collaborating with investors, innovators
and industry leaders to spur substantial new investment where it
will have the greatest impact. The CEFC invests on behalf of the
Australian Government, with a strong commitment to deliver a
positive return for taxpayers across our portfolio.

The mission of the Office of Energy and Climate Change is to
accelerate NSW’s transformation to a sustainable future. It will
deliver key strategies and programs that focus on addressing
some of the most significant issues facing our state including
energy reliability, climate change and emissions reduction. Its
work is integral to the state’s economic recovery and a key pillar
of NSW economic policy.

The information provided in this guide is for illustrative purposes only. In all cases, building owners are encouraged to consult with
dedicated professionals to assist them in electrifying a building.

How to use
this guide

This guide outlines the steps involved in retrofitting existing buildings to
be all-electric and the types of technologies that can be used today to
replace natural gas systems with electric solutions. If you are a building
owner, developer, facilities manager, consultant or building professional,
this guide is for you.

Understand the case for electrification

Delivering
Climate
Positive
Buildings

The diagram shows typical steps to decarbonise buildings. This guide
covers the first: how to eliminate fossil fuels for space heating, hot
water and cooking in existing buildings. A separate guide is available
focusing on new buildings. We encourage you to apply all these steps
in every building in your portfolio.

Standard building

Climate change ● Investor benefits ● Resilience and risk reduction
● Health and safety ● Tenant and consumer preferences

Measure typical greenhouse
gas (GHG) emissions due to
energy use and repair,
maintenance & refurbishment.

Planning for electrification

This guide

Planning to electrify a portfolio ● Electrifying a building over time
● Intervention points ● The stakeholders

Seven key issues to consider when
electrifying an existing building or portfolio
Space heating ● Domestic hot water ● Cooking ● Other systems
● Electric vehicles ● Electrical capacity ● Space & location

Highly efficient

Case studies

Legend

600 & 678 Victoria Street ● Vicinity Centres portfolio
● 275 Kent Street & 8 Chifley Square ● QuadReal Property Group
● Kawakawa, Dargaville & Kaitaia hospitals ● 22 The Terrace

GHG
EMISSIONS

Marketing all-electric buildings ● Green Star ● NABERS
● Other frameworks

Electricity

Ventilation, cooling,
lighting, pumps, small
power, lifts, security,
controls, and IT systems.
Emergency (backup)
power, and refrigerants.

More information
Other

Myths & barriers

Appendices

Materials in
operation

Terminology ● References

A practical guide to electrification: For existing buildings

USED FOR

Space heating,
domestic hot water
Natural gas and cooking.

Marketing & certification

A separate guide for
New Zealand is available
from the New Zealand
Green Building Council

Fossil fuel free
Eliminate natural gas for
space heating, domestic
hot water and cooking,
both base building and
tenants.

01

Emissions from
products, materials and
activities for repair,
maintenance and
refurbishment.

Significantly reduce all building
energy consumption through
demand reduction, energy
efficiency and effective controls.

Powered by
renewables
Provide all electricity from 100%
renewable sources – on-site
and/or off-site.

Reduce embodied
carbon
Significantly reduce embodied
carbon through material/product
selection during operations and
refurbishment.

Offset with nature
After reducing all other GHG
emissions as much as possible
procure credible nature based
offsets.
A practical guide to electrification: For existing buildings

02

A guide to
electrification

Climate change, health and wellbeing, natural resource
depletion, consumer preferences, investor demand - these are key
issues that are impacting how we operate and upgrade existing
buildings in our towns and cities. A key challenge across all of them is
how we move away from traditional solutions to deliver more
sustainable and higher performing buildings.
If we are to significantly reduce operational greenhouse gas (GHG)
emissions in the built environment and meet net zero carbon goals, it
is crucial that existing buildings undergo a transition to be fossil
fuel free, primarily by eliminating the use of natural gas.

Most buildings standing today will still be operational in
2050. Electrifying existing buildings now will ensure they
are future-proofed for a decarbonised world.
Technologies are available to design out fossil fuels for all typical
uses in a building today. An all-electric building comes with many
benefits:
Natural gas typically represents between 10% and 30% of
building GHG emissions. The electricity grid is rapidly
decarbonising and renewable electricity is readily procurable,
while the decarbonisation of the natural gas network is unlikely
in the foreseeable future.
Separate bills for gas (consumption and standing charges) are
eliminated, as are gas maintenance and safety checks.
Healthier internal spaces are achieved by reducing gas
combustion and leakage inside buildings.
Corporate tenants and debt and equity investors with zero
carbon goals are increasingly attracted to all-electric buildings
powered by renewables.

The most common uses of fossil fuels in buildings that
can be electrified are:
Natural gas for space heating, domestic hot water and cooking
Diesel for emergency/backup generators and fire system
pumps.
There are other uses of fossil fuels that are found in some buildings
such as gas for high heat industrial processes, portable gas heaters
for external spaces, gas for laboratory purposes or similar and LPG for
barbeques. While not the subject of the guide, building owners are
encouraged to consider alternatives to all natural gas use wherever
possible.

A practical guide to electrification: For existing buildings

03

The case for
electrification
– the right
solution today

Burning fossil fuels to generate heat and to cook food has been the
go-to solution since the industrial revolution. Natural gas boilers and
cookers are the pinnacle of this old technology in buildings, and have
previously offered lower carbon solutions than grid electricity
generated using coal.
But we are seeing a revolution in clean energy to address the
challenges of climate change, air quality and energy affordability.
Electrifying buildings is an essential step to do this. The technologies
already exist - the key challenges are changing perceptions and
improving understanding of the benefits of electrification and how to
implement it.
In the business case for an all-electric building, the following factors
can be considered:
Climate change: all-electric buildings powered by renewables
are the preferred pathway to decarbonise our built environment.
Removing fossil fuels from buildings is necessary to reduce
climate change impacts. Electrification is also the best enabler to
deliver buildings fully powered by renewables today.
Investor benefits: investors are looking for assets that are on a
clear decarbonisation pathway. All-electric buildings that use
renewable energy will be able to access sustainable finance,
potentially at lower interest rates.
Resilience and risk reduction: as we move into a state of
decarbonising the economy, the need to retrofit assets and
remove equipment using fossil fuels from service will only
become more important. An all-electric building is a step ahead,
making it a more valuable and desirable asset, ready for the
future.
Health benefits: using natural gas for cooking in buildings
generates toxic air pollutants. Occupants are exposed to these
pollutants during combustion as well as due to leakage. These
impacts can increase asthma and exacerbate respiratory
illnesses. All-electric services eliminate these pollutants,
improving indoor air quality.
Tenant and consumer preferences: many organisations have
set goals for zero carbon. Natural gas and other fossil fuels are
incompatible with these goals. An all-electric building will be
more attractive to these organisations and consumers as well.
Each of these reasons is expanded in the next few pages, including
references that provide more information. Understanding the drivers
and benefits for electrification will help in developing a business case
to electrify an existing building and/or portfolio.

A practical guide to electrification: For existing buildings

04

1

we drastically reduce GHG emissions. If we don’t, the effects of this
warming will be dangerous, costly, and irreversible.

The built environment is a significant contributor to our national GHG
emissions. It accounts for almost a quarter of total emissions in
Australia. Of these emissions, natural gas use in buildings accounts
for 15% 2 of all operational emissions (around 14 million tonnes of
CO2 a year). Eliminating these emissions matters.
It is not only the amount of emissions that matter – there is a time
impact as well. Emissions from the use of natural gas, or methane,
include both the direct emissions from combustion in a building
(Scope 1) and the emissions from its extraction, processing, and
distribution (Scope 3). The emissions due to methane escaping to the
atmosphere are three times more impactful over a 20-year period
than over a typical 100 year spana. As noted above, the next ten years
is critical.

Grid electricity Scope 2 & 3 GHG emissions factor (kgCO2e per kWh)

To minimise the risk of catastrophic climate change the average
The case for
global temperature rise must be keep to below 1.5°C. According to
electrification – the Intergovernmental Panel for Climate Change (IPCC) , the
climate change world has eight to ten years left before we cross this threshold unless

Victoria

0.95

New
South
Wales

0.82

South
Australia

0.34

a As noted by the Clean

Energy Regulator, when
the Global Warming
Potential (GWP) of
methane is measured
over 20 years (GWP20),
the impact of methane is
84-87 times that of CO2.
If measured over 100
years (GWP100), the
impact is 28 times that
of CO2. This is due to
methane being shorter
lived in the atmosphere
before breaking down
into CO2 and water. This
CO2 continues to warm
the atmosphere.

It is clear, electrification is a critical pathway on
the decarbonisation journey to net zero buildings
and precincts.
Zero carbon fuels, such as biofuels and green hydrogen, have a part
to play in decarbonising our economy, but they are likely better used
in other sectors such as transport and manufacturing processes.

A practical guide to electrification: For existing buildings

05

Equivalent GWP 100 year kgCO2/kWh for gas boiler

0.42

0.19

100%
renewable
electricity

0.10
0
2050

2040

2030

2020

2060

Assumed grid decarbonisation over time

The IPCC noted in its latest report1 that methane emissions should
be reduced at a much faster rate than previously assumed. This
formed the basis of the Global Methane Pledge3 at COP26 in
Glasgow.
In buildings this means eliminating natural gas. Of the available
alternatives to natural gas, including hydrogen biofuels, electrification
is supported as the preferred path for buildings by the IPCC and the
International Energy Agency (IEA) 4. The Australian Government
has highlighted5 electrification as a key technology available now for
decarbonisation. The ACT Government has released an electrification
pathway detailing the transition away from fossil fuel gas to reach the
Territory's target of net zero emissions by 20456. NABERS
benchmarks will be regularly updated to use the latest electricity grid
emission factors. As the grid decarbonises this will favour
electrification as a means of improving ratings.

Equivalent GWP 20 year kgCO2/kWh for gas boiler

The chart above shows the point at which the use of gas boilers
becomes more carbon intensive than producing the same amount
of heat using an average electric heat pumpb when considering the
projected rate of grid decarbonisation5.
The bubbles below show the cumulative operational GHG
emissions (tCO2e) generated for an average heat pump and gas
boiler in different statesc over 25 years based on producing 1MWh
of heat per year.

6.0

2.2

1.2

0.6

Gas boiler
(100 year
GWP)

Heat
pump in
VIC - grid
electricity

Heat pump in
NSW - grid
electricity

Heat pump
in SA - grid
electricity

b Assuming a heat

pump with an average
coefficient of
performance of 3 and
a gas boiler with 90%
efficiency.

c different states have

different grid
coefficients. In
Australia, Victoria has
the most emission
intensive grid, with
South Australia one of
the cleanest.

Heat pump
with 100%
renewables

What these charts outline is that any building
that uses gas will emit far more than an allelectric building, even if the building did not
procure renewable electricity. When paired with
on-site or off-site renewables, the GHG
emissions savings are substantial.
A practical guide to electrification: For existing buildings

06

The case for
electrification
– investor
benefits

Green, social, and sustainable bonds, green and sustainabilitylinked loans, and sustainability-linked bonds resulted in global
sustainable debt capital surpassing US$700 billion in 20217, a 30%
increase compared to 2019.
Sustainability linked loans are finance instruments in which the
terms of the loan (for example the interest rate, where lower rates
are possible for good performance) are linked to the borrower’s or
project’s environmental, social, and governance (ESG)
performance. By 2021 their global volume reached US$350 billion
for the year7. For example, in Australia, Charter Hall funded a $500
million loan with targets aligned to NABERS and Green Star8.
Organisations such as the Clean Energy Finance Corporation
(CEFC) and Climate Bonds Initiative are helping unlock investment
capital to deliver enhanced sustainability performance.
With access to $10 billion to invest on behalf of the Australian
Government, the CEFC invests to address some of Australia’s
toughest emissions challenges. Its property-related investment
commitments include ‘demonstration’ projects with the ability to
deliver best-in-class emissions performance using renewable
energy, energy efficiency and low emissions technologies - across
new and existing commercial, industrial and residential
buildings. A new CEFC program in 2022 is also seeking to
substantially cut construction-related embodied carbon emissions,
through the use of mass engineered timber as a greener alternative
to conventional construction materials.
The Climate Bonds Initiative is an international organisation that
works to mobilise the $100 trillion bond market for climate
solutions. Several green bonds issued in Australia and New
Zealand are financing low carbon commercial buildings. Last year,
the Initiative recognised9 Green Star’s Climate Positive Pathway as
an automatic compliance route due to its electrification
requirements and energy reduction targets.
Recently, the EU Taxonomy10 for sustainable activities outlined how
finance streams should be directed to deliver a decarbonised
economy. While the guidance on the use of natural gas is limited, it
is clear that all-electric buildings that are highly energy efficient
comply with its requirements. This will help direct even more
investor interest to these assets.

The case for
electrification
– resilience
and risk
reduction

Buildings that are not resilient to climate change or responding to
changing regulatory and economic environments may end up as
stranded assets11. At the very least, they may be uncompetitive in a
sector that is rapidly responding to the climate change challenge.
The coming desirability for all-electric buildings is predictable. Over
the past several decades policies have been introduced that
resulted in buildings becoming more energy efficient. The
Australian Government’s own ‘Long Term Emissions Reduction
Plan (2021)’ highlights electrification as a desirable outcome.
Policies to achieve this aren’t far behind.
In 2017, the Taskforce for Climate Related Financial Disclosures
(TCFD) recommended12 that Boards of Directors review and
analyse the potential for both physical risk and transition risk.
Amongst the many recommendations was the consideration of an
asset becoming a stranded asset due to its use of fossil fuels, its
increased costs due to the use of costlier fuel sources, changing
consumer habits and preferences for zero carbon. As the TCFD
recommendations are being adopted by bodies such as the
International Sustainability Standards Board (ISSB), which is part of
the International Financial Reporting Standard Foundation,
disclosing climate risk will become expected in all corporate
reporting.
Business leaders also have a financial responsibility to deliver
assets that are affordable and represent value for money over the
long-term. This includes being future-proofed for a changing
climate and the potential future costs associated with carbon
emissions. In 2020, 72% said they conduct a structured and formal
review of environmental, social and governance (ESG) disclosures
(up from 32% in 2018) while a further 25% evaluate non-financial
disclosure informally13.
Managing for the volatility of gas prices makes sense. Over the
period of 2010 to 2021, wholesale and retail gas prices have risen
significantly14. Natural gas prices in Australia are linked to global
prices. These are subject to major shocks, including geopolitical
upheaval associated with the major gas producers such as Russia.
Decoupling the operating costs of buildings from global politics by
utilising locally generated renewable electricity is a key benefit of
all-electric buildings.
Finally, there is the question of future-proofing assets. Maintaining
natural gas systems and infrastructure in current buildings means
continued reliance on, and maintenance of, aging fossil fuel
infrastructure, which may eventually be decommissioned.

A practical guide to electrification: For existing buildings

07

A practical guide to electrification: For existing buildings

08

The case for
electrification
– health and
safety benefits

The case for
electrification
– tenant and
consumer
preferences

Natural gas produces a range of harmful pollutants including
nitrogen dioxide, carbon monoxide and fine, toxic particulate
matter.
During extraction and production, spills and leaks of dangerous
chemicals can occur, and these can have significant impacts on
human health15. Air pollution from gas processing, venting and
flaring can also impact air quality and nearby communities16.
Using natural gas in buildings can directly impact the health and
wellbeing of occupants and users17:
When gas cooktops are used, pollutants are introduced into
the kitchen. Good ventilation and modern exhaust fans can
reduce harmful indoor air pollution but can’t eliminate it.
Kitchens with gas cookers are also hotter to be in, as the
heat from gas combustion heats the kitchen as well as the
pans. This results in a less thermally comfortable home or
workplace.
Recent research18 has found that the effect of gas cooktops
in homes on childhood asthma is comparable to the impact
of passive smoking in the household. Much of this impact is
due to ongoing leakage from cooktops when they are not in
use.
Space and water heating with gas produces similar pollutants.
These have less impact within buildings as they are mostly (but
not always) vented directly outside. While this mitigates the risk of
these pollutants in an indoor environment, the building still
contributes to the air pollution of our cities. Air pollution is an
ongoing concern and thought to contribute to the deaths of almost
5,000 Australians each year19.

Many organisations and governments have made clear public
commitments to GHG emissions reduction targets. Demonstrating
a commitment to keep global warming below 1.5ºC, and executing
on it, is now a competitive advantage.
The World Green Building Council’s (WorldGBC) Net Zero Carbon
Buildings Commitment (NZCBC)20 aims to create a market for net
zero carbon buildings by 2030. As of June 2022, more than 30
organisations and governments from Australia have signed up.
The Science Based Targets Initiative21 and RE10022 (which requires
the use of 100% renewable energy by 2030) have hundreds of
global companies signed up to their programs.
Green Star Performance v223, the new rating tool for the operation
of buildings, has already set clear targets to remove fossil fuels
from buildings between now and 2040. This requirement starts in
2026 for 6 Star rated buildings and cascades down to all ratings by
2040 at the latest. Green Star is used by many organisations to
identify green buildings to lease or occupy.
Influential commercial chefs are waking up to the opportunity and
praising the benefits of induction equipment in their restaurants.
The benefits are many, from cleaner, safer kitchens, to more
comfortable environments to cook in. See here.

If you can’t stand the heat, get the gas out of the
kitchen.
Consumers also want better options. ASBEC’s Roadmap for
Sustainable Homes24 notes that consumers are looking for green
and healthy homes and apartments. Health is a major concern, and
as awareness grows on the link between poor health outcomes and
cooking with gas, this impact and interest in all-electric homes will
grow. Consumers are also becoming more safety-minded, with
many noting gas stoves remain hot for some time after turning off
and pose a fire risk.
Consumer preferences will be influenced as environmental and
health campaigns scale up. Already home renovation shows on TV
are demonstrating the benefits of induction, and global campaigns
promoting the health benefits of all-electric cooking will likely help
change minds further.

From a health perspective, as a doctor and
mother, there's a double impact from gas.
Not only is it a major source of health pollution
in people’s homes, it's also a fossil fuel.
Dr. Kate Charlesworth, “Cooking with gas? Research finds health and
emissions risks even when stoves are off”, ABC news, 27 Jan 2022

A practical guide to electrification: For existing buildings

09

A practical guide to electrification: For existing buildings

10

Between now and 2040

First steps

Planning to electrify a portfolio

Set zero carbon goals

Prepare high level portfolio plan

Set a target date for the portfolio to be fossil fuel free
(preferably well before 2040) as part of a Zero Carbon
portfolio plan covering reducing energy consumption,
renewable energy, embodied carbon, refrigerants and
other operational GHG emissions.

Review fossil fuel consumption across the portfolio,
the uses for natural gas, and the type and age of gas
equipment and systems.

Identify any changes to central or local plant that may
impact on tenants including service disruptions, lease
clauses, energy costs and capital cost contributions.

Identify who has control or ability (building owner and/
or tenant) to remove gas from a building or tenancy.

Implement a due diligence process for acquisitions that
identifies and prices carbon reduction and includes
electrification requirements to support achieving the
Zero Carbon portfolio plan.

Prepare a feasibility study for each building, including
types of electric technologies and any technical or
spatial challenges (refer to ‘six things to consider’
section)

Where tenants use gas directly (e.g. gas cooktops) then
engage with tenants to discuss benefits and costs of
converting to all electric and discuss how gas could be
phased out. Consider potential incentives and triggers
(e.g. lease renewal, new fitout)

Commit to no gas connections in new developments
(see ‘A Practical Guide to Electrification for New
Buildings’).

Identify priority opportunities for the next five to ten
years, including budget allowances, and align where
possible with other upgrades or tenant refits planned
across the portfolio.

Prepare building plans

Deliver

Prepare a detailed electrification plan for each building
– refer to “Electrifying a building over time” on the next
page for further guidance.

Integrate the building electrification plans into the
asset management and upgrade plans and budgets
for the portfolio. Implement the electrification projects
at the earliest opportunity in each building.

Share your experiences and lessons learned with others
and encourage tenants to do the same – the whole built
environment needs to rapidly decarbonise, not just the
leaders (the people reading this guide).

Continue to actively advocate and engage with tenants
to speed up electrification of their tenancies –
technologies are rapidly evolving, and initial resistance
may soon be replaced with embracing the benefits.

Prepare a strategy to make the building more resilient
and responsive to a changing electricity grid.

Identify potential trigger points, such as end of life of
equipment, lease renewals, tenant fitouts and base
building upgrades (e.g. lobby upgrade, new End of Trip
facilities, EV charging rollout, etc.) and align
electrification projects with these where possible.
Integrate electrification with other zero carbon plans
and strategies, such as Electric Vehicle charging
rollout, installing on-site renewables and energy
storage systems.

Communicate your plans with investors to demonstrate
the benefits of all electrification. Identify if sustainable
finance is available to help fund the projects.

A practical guide to electrification: For existing buildings

11

Engage with tenants and users

Amend future leasing agreements to eliminate future
gas connections, and work with current and
prospective tenants to incentivise early electrification.

Next steps

If you sell a building before you can electrify it, then
share the electrification plan with the purchaser. This
helps ensure that the building you previously owned
continues to be on a path to decarbonisation.

A practical guide to electrification: For existing buildings

12

Review

Review building systems

Review

Electrifying
a building
over time

Identify type and age of all fossil-fuel using equipment
and associated infrastructure including in tenancies.
Review asset plan and identify opportunities to integrate
electrification projects with planned replacement or
other upgrade projects.
Conduct feasibility study of potential electrification
strategies – refer to “six things to consider” section.
Budget for consulting advice if needed to develop
design and documentation.

Prepare the plan

Plan

Engage (or use in-house) engineers to audit the existing
natural gas systems and electrical infrastructure and
prepare an electrification design and options report. The
report should also identify opportunities to reduce energy
use and peak electrical demand.
Where tenants use gas (e.g. gas cooktops), discuss
benefits and costs of converting to all electric. Consider
potential incentives and triggers (e.g. lease renewal, new
fitout) to speed up transition.
Change new lease agreements to remove gas supply to
tenancies.
Align electrification works with other intervention points
where possible. (See next page).

Deliver

Deliver
Prepare design, specifications and drawings for the
electrification works including mechanical, electrical
and hydraulics systems. Engage an architect if changes
to floor plans or facades are required.

Intervention
points for
electrification

There are key points in the lifetime of a building that provide
opportunities to implement electrification projects at the same time.
These include:

End-of-life
replacement

When gas equipment is nearing the end-of-life, change to all
electric. This may not always be a simple like-for-like replacement
due to the way the systems work. (See pages 16 – 24).

Tenant refit or lease
renewal

As tenancies are refreshed or renewed, existing gas connections
should be removed. This will require discussion with tenants that
currently use natural gas systems, primarily for cooking, but could
also include other specialist uses such as laboratories.

End-of-trip facilities
refresh

In commercial offices these are often a major user of domestic
water. Consider the potential for a dedicated localised electric
heat pump system for these (together with water efficiency to
reduce hot water demand) and point of use electric water heaters
for bathrooms elsewhere in the building.

Common area or
lobby upgrades

Refreshing the building’s lobby and common areas provides an
opportunity to undertake electrification works by integrating them
into the overall capital works budget.

Electrical
infrastructure
upgrades

Installing electric vehicle chargers and renewable energy and
energy storage systems provides an opportunity to review, and
where required upgrade, the electrical infrastructure to
accommodate electrification of natural gas systems.

Engage other specialists as required, e.g. acoustics,
building certifiers.

Fine Tune

Implement the works, staging as required, to align with
other projects in the building.

Continuous improvement
Fine tune the building systems and controls to optimise
energy efficiency and reduce peak demands.
Identify any remaining non-electric equipment in the building,
and plan to remove before 2040.
Provide training to facilities management staff and update
building manuals.
A practical guide to electrification: For existing
existing buildings
buildings

13

A practical guide to electrification: For existing buildings

14

Stakeholders
Everyone has a part to play in advocating for all-electric existing buildings. In addition, all
stakeholders can take specific actions as per the below:

Seven key
issues to
consider
when
electrifying
an existing
building or
portfolio

This next section provides you with key questions to identify the
current state of the building, and information to help you
understand the systems, impacts and potential solutions.

Investors

Establish a policy to only invest in buildings that are zero
carbon and fossil fuel free. For existing buildings insist that a
zero carbon transition pathway is provided and implemented.

Owners

Promote the benefits of electric buildings, and seek to own,
procure and build only all-electric buildings. Ensure any owned
existing assets are electrified as promptly as possible.

Authorities

Review policies and procedures to ensure they don't
encourage or mandate that natural gas has to be provided to
buildings or precincts.

Electricity
Utilities

Support building owners and designers to convert to allelectric buildings, including measures for grid stability and
assessing electrical capacity versus actual demand.

Other systems

Professional
services

Design to convert existing buildings to be all-electric and be
familiar with different design solutions and emerging
technologies. Advocate for zero carbon solutions.

Electric vehicles

Builders &
Trades

Become familiar with all-electric systems and how to install in
existing buildings. Prepare alternative all-electric solutions
when bidding on refurbishments and building upgrades.

Leasing &
Sales Agents

Engage with existing and potential tenants and purchasers to
advocate for all-electric cooking solutions. Be prepared with
evidence to demonstrate the benefits.

Facilities
Manager

Ensure that the building is running to its maximum potential,
creating a comfortable environment and managing the peak
electrical demands of the building. Also advocate for the safer
solution that fully electric buildings provide.

Tenants &
Occupants

Ask for fossil fuel free solutions. For retail food and beverage look
at the benefits of switching to all-electric for cooking.
Electrification is consistent with the net zero carbon targets to
which many corporates and governments are now committed.

AApractical
practicalguide
guidetotoelectrification:
electrification:For
Forexisting
existingbuildings
buildings

15

Space heating

Impacts

Systems

Domestic hot water
Cooking

Electrical capacity

Space & location

A practical guide to electrification: For existing buildings

16

How to electrify
a building:
Alternatives
to natural gas

Electric
alternatives

Impacts and
benefits

Key questions

Space heating

Technical
considerations

Space heating is often provided using centralised gas boilers to
generate hot water which is then circulated to emitters, such as
heating coils in air handling units, to heat spaces. Gas boilers are
also often used to inject heat into condenser water systems
connected to water sourced heat pumps. Localised gas systems
include radiant and direct heaters.

Gas

Alternative

Gas boiler (central)

• Heat pumps
• Variable Refrigerant Flow (VRF)
system (heating and cooling)

Gas radiant

• Electric radiant

Gas ducted / fire / heater

• All of the above

Air source heat pumps require more plant room space than gas boilers to
produce the same heat output. They also require good natural ventilation
in order to extract heat from the air. This is why condenser units for
reverse cycle air conditioners are typically located on roofs or apartment
balconies. Refer to the Space and location section for further details.
Electrical capacity
Replacing gas systems with electric alternatives will increase the demand
for electricity during heating periods. This may impact on the electrical
infrastructure in the building, although in many buildings the electrical
demand for cooling systems in summer will be higher than the electrical
demand of heating systems in winter. Refer to the Electrical capacity
section for further details.
Other considerations

Switching from gas boilers to electric heat pumps is likely to have
the following impacts and benefits in existing buildings:
Space and location

• More space needed
• Natural ventilation needed

Electrical capacity

• Potential increase in peak electrical
demand

Other

• Potential impact on existing heating hot
water pipes, pumps and coils

Energy costs

• Lower operating costs

Health

• No air pollutants from gas

GHG emissions

• Zero (with renewables)

1.

Space and location

The amount of heat that can be delivered via heating hot water is a
function of water temperature (°C) and flow rate (l/s) - the lower the
temperature, the more flow is required to deliver the same heating
energy.
In existing buildings, the flow and return temperatures in the heating hot
water system may have been designed for the higher temperatures able
to be generated by gas boilers (e.g. 80°C). In some buildings steam is
used. To maximise energy efficiency, heat pumps generate lower
temperature hot water (typically 40-45°C). Depending on the system
design, a switch to heat pumps may require pipes, pumps and heating
coils (in AHUs and/or ducts) to be replaced. In some cases, shifting to
local rather than central solutions may be warranted.
Lowering heating hot water temperatures has other benefits including:
Reducing health and safety risk for maintenance workers.

What gas systems are used to provide space heating?

2. When are they due for replacement?
3. Do you have suitable space available to install an electric
system?
4. Do you have sufficient electrical capacity in the main
switchboard and substation?

Potential to use waste heat from chillers to provide heating during
mid-season and avoid running heating and cooling systems
independently.
Some dehumidification systems in commercial air conditioning systems
use gas generated heating hot water to reheat the air after it has been
cooled to reduce moisture. When gas boilers are removed then 'free
reheat' should be investigated, including using waste heat from chillers
instead of a like-for-like approach using heating hot water from the new
heat pumps.
Optimising and tweaking controls of heat pumps will also be important.
They must be set up properly, otherwise inefficiencies will also occur.

A practical guide to electrification: For existing buildings

17

A practical guide to electrification: For existing buildings

18

How to electrify
a building:
Alternatives
to natural gas
Electric
alternatives

Impacts and
benefits

Key questions

Domestic hot water

Technical
considerations

Space and location

Domestic hot water is typically provided using gas boilers,
particularly in centralised systems. Decentralised domestic hot
water systems can be either gas boilers or instantaneous electric.

Air source heat pumps and thermal storage tanks require more plant
room space than gas boilers to produce the same daily and peak
hour hot water volumes. They also require good natural ventilation in
order to extract heat from the air. Refer to the Space and location
section for further details.

Gas

Alternative

Electrical capacity

Gas boiler (central)

• Heat pumps with thermal storage tanks

Gas boiler (local)

• Instantaneous electric
• Heat pump

Demand for domestic hot water is typically consistent all year round.
The electrical load to generate the hot water could occur during the
building peak electrical demand period. Replacing gas systems with
electric alternatives is therefore likely to increase the demand for
electricity in the building. This can be managed through thermal
energy storage and energy demand management to shift the peak.
Refer to the Electrical capacity section for further details.

Switching from gas boilers to electric heat pumps is likely to have
the following impacts and benefits in existing buildings:

Other considerations

Space and location

• More space needed
• Natural ventilation needed

Electrical capacity

• Potential increase in peak electrical
demand

Other

• Increase hot water storage in central
systems
• Consider use of small electric heaters at
point of use

Energy costs

• Lower operating costs

Health

• No air pollutants from gas

GHG emissions

• Zero (with renewables)

1.

Thermal storage pre-heat tanks connected to the condenser water
loop can also help capture waste heat from chillers before rejection to
cooling towers. Thermal storage can also help with demand response
serving as a way to store renewable energy generated during the day
as heat to use during other times.
Local vs centralised hot water systems
In buildings with low distributed demand for domestic hot water, local
electric point of use heaters can be considered. Local systems can
result in an increase in peak electrical demand compared to a central
system. When evaluating the cost-benefits consider the energy
efficiency of heat generation, pumping energy, pipework and standing
losses, and peak electrical demand.

What gas systems are used to provide domestic hot
water?

2. When are they due for replacement?
3. Do you have suitable space available to install an
electric system?
4. Do you have sufficient capacity in the main switchboard
and substation?
5. Is the system central or local?

A practical guide to electrification: For existing buildings

Gas boilers are often sized to meet the peak hot water demand. A like
for like capacity replacement with heat pumps would lead to more
space needed and a higher peak electricity demand. To mitigate this,
heat pumps can be designed to meet the daily demand with storage
tanks to manage the peak hourly demand.

19

In buildings with a mix of domestic hot water demand, such as
commercial buildings with an end-of-trip facility with showers (high
demand) and bathroom wash basin taps (low demand) a
combination of systems can be used - heat pumps located near to
the high demand and point of use heaters for the distributed low
demand.

A practical guide to electrification: For existing buildings

20

Explainer:
Heat pumps and
refrigerants

A technology for the electrification of buildings is heat pumps. These
use refrigerants which have a GHG emissions impact if they leak to
the atmosphere, and this needs to be considered in whole-of-life
carbon footprint assessments.

What is a heat pump?

A heat pump is a device that uses the refrigeration cycle to move
(pump) heat from one place to another. A compressor, typically
powered by an electric motor, pumps a refrigerant around a piped
circuit containing an evaporator (which absorbs heat), an
expansion valve and a condenser (which rejects heat).

Replace early, or
replace late? The
carbon impacts.

There are two main types of heat pumps:

•

1,600

Air-source – the heat pump extracts or rejects heat to the
outside air.

1,527
1,400

Ground-source –the heat pump extracts or rejects heat to
either the ground, or to a large body of water (lake, sea, river,
etc.).

1,200

A common type of heat pump is a fridge which removes heat from
the food stored inside the fridge and transfers it to the back of the
fridge (which gets warms).
Many heat pumps use a class of refrigerants called
Managing refrigerant
impacts – today and in Hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs). While these refrigerants have a zero
the future
Ozone Depletion Potential (ODP) they can have a high Global
Warming Potential (GWP), ranging from under 100 to well over
2,000 (i.e. over 2,000 times more potent than CO2). However, due
to the relatively small volume of refrigerants and leakage to
atmosphere, the overall GHG impact from refrigerants can be
small, particularly if heat pumps using low GWP refrigerants are
selected.

1,000

840

800

600

400

200

216

0

2023

In 2016, the Montreal Protocol, which successfully phased out
ozone depleting refrigerants, was updated to require the gradual
phase-down of high-GWP HFCs by 203625. Green Star Buildings
considers refrigerants with a GWP less than 10 to be low GWP.

2030

Replace gas boiler in 2040

There are heat pumps available today that use natural refrigerants
such as ammonia or carbon dioxide (CO2). Using CO2 as a
refrigerant has many benefits, one of which is its low GWP of 1
compared to HFC refrigerants. Chillers are already available with
very low GWP (<2) Hydrofluroolefins (HFOs) refrigerants, and
heat pumps using these are also under development.

A practical guide to electrification: For existing buildings

Cumulative tCO2e

•

Replacing gas boilers before their end of serviceable life
requires consideration of the whole of life carbon impacts as
well as the cost. The chart below provides an example
assessment of the operating energy emissions, the embodied
carbon of the equipment and assumed refrigerant leakage for
a space heating gas boiler in a typical Sydney office building for
three scenarios – replace with a heat pump in 2040, replace
now and use grid electricity, and replace now and procure
100% renewable electricity.

21

2040
Replace gas boiler now

2050
Replace gas boiler now and
procure 100% renewable electricity

Assumptions: 4.5 star NABERS Energy office base building in Sydney CBD with 20,000m2 NLA, 13% of energy is gas for
space heating, NSW natural gas GHG coefficients and grid electricity decarbonisation as per page 6, gas boiler efficiency
= 90%, heat pump CoP = 3, new heat pumps installed in 2040 for all scenarios, refrigerant GWP = 124 (in 2023) and 41 (in
2040), 9% annual refrigerant leakage rate, embodied carbon of 11 kgCO2e per kg of equipment (source: CIBSE).

A practical guide to electrification: For existing buildings

22

How to electrify
a building:
Alternatives
to natural gas
Electric
alternatives

Impacts and
benefits

Key questions

Cooking

Technical
considerations

Cooking is often provided using gas cooktops and other equipment
in commercial and domestic kitchens. However, electric
alternatives, including induction technologies, have significantly
improved over the past few years to become more attractive and
affordable.

Technical requirements
Alternative electric approaches exist for cooking styles that need
flame. When needed, localised fuel sources, preferably using a
renewable biofuel or biogas, can be used. Discussing with potential
retail tenants and agents early the benefits of all electric kitchens, can
help lessen concerns as the industry transitions over the next few
years (see here).

Gas

Alternative

Gas cooktop

• Induction

Flame & char

• Electric charcoal grille
• Portable renewable gas cooktop
• Electric grille with steam for moisture

Wok burner

• Induction wok burner

Location and space

Gas oven

• Electric oven
• Electric steam oven

Induction cooktops save space, creating additional workspace when
not used for cooking, and, through their controllability, being able to
replace other specialist equipment.

Moving from equipment that uses gas or other fossil fuels is likely
to have the following impacts and benefits on existing buildings.
Space and location

• Smaller extract ducts
• Smaller kitchen possible

Electrical capacity

• Increase in peak electrical demand

Capital costs

• Higher initial investment

Energy costs

• Lower operating costs

Health

• Better indoor air quality & more
comfortable temperatures in kitchen
• Reduced risk of burns

GHG Emissions

• Zero (with renewables)

1.

When converting kitchens to all electric also consider the potential to
reduce supply and exhaust ventilation flow rates. This can save fan
and cooling energy, create quieter spaces and reduce material use in
the fitout.

Benefits and other reasons to electrify
As the many benefits of all electric kitchens become apparent, chefs
are now training to use all-electric equipment and changing cooking
techniques to suit. Those that do are finding all electric kitchens
provide a safer, healthier, and more productive kitchen. The next page
outlines the reasons why and the financial benefits.
In domestic settings, consumers (and developers) are increasingly
aware of the improved health and safety, ease of cleaning, and better
controllability of induction cooking and making the switch from gas.
As interest in avoiding the impact of indoor air pollutants associated
with combustion and methane leakage from gas cooktops grows, the
pace of the transition is likely to increase.

Is gas or other fossil fuels directly used to provide cooking?

2. Would installing electrical cooking throughout increase the
annual peak electrical demand of the building?
3. If tenants own and install the cooking equipment:
a.

How long is the tenancy lease for?

b.

Have you engaged with existing or prospective tenants
about switching to all electric?

c.

If natural gas were to be removed from the building,
could the tenant use portable fuel sources (e.g. bottled
gas) for flame cooking?

A practical guide to electrification: For existing buildings

23

A practical guide to electrification: For existing buildings

24

Retrofitting a commercial kitchen
From wok cookers to griddles, the range of induction equipment available has increased significantly in recent years, as has their popularity.
Induction cooktops have flat surfaces that can be used as extra workspace for food preparation when not being used for cooking. They are
significantly easier and quicker to clean than gas burners with less cleaning chemicals required. They don’t get hot and can be wiped down
immediately – this means less time to clean the kitchen at the end of a shift. Induction cooktops can also be used for multiple types of cooking
due to the ability to control to set temperatures, reducing the amount of specialist equipment required which can deliver space and cost
savings.
Induction cooktops save energy. Compared to gas burners, which are regularly left on during cooking, when a pan is lifted off the induction
surface the electricity consumption stops. Induction cooktops, by turning the pan itself into the heat source, also emit much less direct heat into
a kitchen which can reduce the size, space requirements and energy consumption of kitchen ventilation and space cooling systems.
The quality, speed, heat and benefits are now equivalent or better than gas options. However, the upfront costs can be higher. A study by North
Sydney Council in 2022d analysed a potential transformation of the North Spoon Café from gas to all-electric. The information below summarises
the findings of equipment and operating costs. The bottom line? Any increased capital costs are paid back in a few short years.

Induction wok cooker
range

Cooking efficiency

Heating /preheat
time

Annual energy
consumption

Estimated annual
energy use reduction

Annual cooking
energy cost

Product
cost

53%

5 min 49 sec
(0.5L water)

120,598 MJ

-

$2,641

$3,199

Gas
burner
w/ oven

• Hard to clean
• Fire risk
• Adequate ventilation needed

Induction
w/ oven

• Easy to clean
• Reduced burn risk
• No fumes released

90%

3 min 35 sec
(0.5L water)

36,035 MJ

59%

$789

$6,500

• Hard to clean

50%

14 min
(to 190ºC)

68,913 MJ

-

$1,509

$3,220

Commercial induction
range cooker

Payback
period

2

Deep fryers

years

Gas

Induction

• Easy to clean
• Food is evenly cooked
• More visually appealing

90%

8 min 34 sec
(to 190ºC)

29,288 MJ

58%

$641

$2,000

Griddle/chargrill

Cooktops

Issues

Single-phase induction
oven range

Gas

• Hard to clean
• Fire risk
• Adequate ventilation needed

22%

-

120,598 MJ

-

$2,641

$4,789

Induction

• Easy to clean
• Evenly cooked food
• Reduced burn risk
• No fumes released

0

years

3

years
76%

-

26,658 MJ

78%

$584

$10,970

d With thanks to North Sydney Council for allowing us to use this information.

A practical guide to electrification: For existing buildings

25

A practical guide to electrification: For existing buildings

26

Other systems

Key questions
1.

What other gas or fossil fuels are used in the building?
a. For each of those systems, what is their expected life?

Backup and
emergency
power

b. Are there other alternatives that can be considered?

Many buildings have diesel generators for emergency power during
electricity blackouts. While diesel consumption typically accounts
for less than 1% of the operating GHG emissions, over time it will
need to be phased out to deliver fully fossil fuel free buildings.
Some alternatives to diesel generators that could be considered are
outlined below.

2. How much energy do these systems consume?
3. Is there a business case to bring the replacements forward
in alignment with your zero carbon strategy?

Biofuel
Batteries
Green hydrogen

Potential
sources of
fossil fuels in
your building
Other uses of
natural gas in
buildings

Cogeneration
equipment

Steam
Laboratory equipment
Industrial processes
Backup and emergency power
Cogeneration equipment

There are a range of specialist uses in some buildings and not all of
these have a simple alternative to fossil fuels. In these cases, effort
should be made to find a replacement, or design the building for
easy adaptability in the future. Some examples are:

Steam in hospitals
Steam is used for sterilisation and typically generated by using gas.
Alternatives include dry heat, chemical, plasma gas and vaporised
hydrogen peroxide sterilisation.

Laboratory bunsen burners
Alternatives to bunsen burners connected to a central gas system
include portable burners using butane/propane/LPG canisters and
electric bunsen burners.

Industrial processes
While outside the scope of this guide, green hydrogen produced
from renewable energy sources is predicted to become an
important energy source to decarbonise industrial processes with
high heating requirements such as steel production.

A practical guide to electrification: For existing buildings

27

Gas fired cogeneration systems (generating heat and electricity for
use in buildings) were, for many years, considered a low carbon
transitional technology as they reduced the consumption of grid
electricity and also provided a source of heat. In trigeneration
systems, the heat generated was used to drive an absorption
chiller to make use of the heat during periods when heating is not
required.
The benefit of running a cogeneration system relies on natural gas
being relatively cheaper than grid electricity, making efficient use of
the heat generated all year round, and the grid electricity network
not decarbonising rapidly. In many buildings with existing
cogeneration systems these conditions are no longer being met.
Removing cogeneration may simply be a case of turning it off and
then removing it from the building. However, in some cases the
system may form an integrated part of the emergency power backup, the overall heating capacity and/or the overall cooling capacity
(including low load cooling). Careful consideration of how to
decommission the cogeneration system may be necessary,
including increasing emergency generation, heating systems
and/or electric chiller capacity as required. However, there are
benefits as well, with plant space becoming available for other
uses.
From a climate impact perspective, cogeneration systems should
be phased out quickly from all buildings.

A practical guide to electrification: For existing buildings

28

Electric vehicles
Retrofitting
electric vehicle
charging
points

While not the subject of this guide, retrofitting electric vehicle (EV)
chargers into a building can serve as a potential intervention point
to electrify other systems. This is because the work required to
assess and potentially upgrade the electrical capacity or demand is
similar to that which is needed to electrify other building systems.
There are a number of elements that must be taken into account
when considering EV charging:
Number of car spaces to have charges (now and in future as
car fleet changes)
Type of charges (rapid charge vs trickle charge)
Control of charging including demand management
Aligning time of charging with onsite renewable energy
and/or peak tariff periods
Electrical system capacity.
All of these have implications on the loads that will be introduced
into the building. In non-residential buildings, there may be a
mixture of limited overnight charging, dedicated short term
charging bays, and dedicated fast chargers. In residential
buildings, the expectation might be for all occupants to have
dedicated overnight charging, with a limited number of fast
charging bays for emergencies or visitors.
In most cases, EV charging will induce significant demand in a
building. The demand requirements may be in excess of the
building’s capacity, particularly when combined with other
electrification measures (refer to Electrical capacity section).
While energy efficiency measures can help in driving other loads
down, a smart load management system will be required for the
EV charging system. The smart load management system
monitors power consumption and peak times and manages the
amount of electricity supply available for charging. The load
management system can also help shift charging to a time when
renewables are strongest or when electricity prices may be low.
There are a number of dedicated guides to help you in retrofitting
EV charging in existing buildings. For Australia, the NSW
Government recently published a guide to make commercial and
residential buildings EV ready.

A practical guide to electrification: For existing buildings

29

A practical
practical guide
guide to
to electrification:
electrification: For
For existing
existing buildings
buildings
A

30
22

Managing
peak
demand

Electrical capacity
The electrical capacity of a building is a potential challenge to
removing gas and switching to all electric systems. This section
provides an overview of some of the issues to consider, and why the
issue may not be as big a barrier as first thought.

The electrical demand for domestic hot water is typically consistent all year
round. To reduce peak electrical demand consider thermal storage in central
systems. For point of use systems, the installed capacity can be quite high so
review the load diversity assumptions when calculating the peak electrical
demand.

What is the electrical capacity of the existing substation and
main switchboard?

2. What is the actual annual peak electrical demand in the
building based on historical data when the building is
operating normally (i.e. not during Covid)?

Cooking
The use of all-electric cooking is still evolving and further data on peak electrical
demand and load diversity, particularly in shopping centres and apartments with
multiple kitchens, will become available over time.

3. How much measured spare capacity is there when the
current annual peak demand occurs?

Electric vehicles

4. Are there any other proposed changes to the building that
will change existing electrical demand (increasing it by
electrifying, or decreasing it through energy efficiency and
demand management)?

The transition to electric vehicles (EV) will see an increase in the number of
buildings providing vehicle charging points. A plan should be developed to
manage the peak electrical loads due to EV charging as part of an overall
building electrification strategy.

5. Is other space available for electric systems that can’t be
installed in existing plant rooms or the main switch room?
6. What impact would there be from including electric vehicle
charging on the building’s switchboard capacity or
substation?

Terminology

The peak demand for heating (winter) does not occur at the same time as the
peak demand for cooling (summer). Switching from gas boilers to heat pumps for
space heating typically does not increase the annual electrical peak in most
climate zones in Australia. An exception may occur if heat pumps are used for
reheat as part of the dehumidification process.

Domestic hot water

Key questions
1.

Space heating

Visualising peak demand in a building
This illustrative chart shows how to evaluate the winter and summer peaks after electrification compared
to the annual capacity of the building.

Substation
Converts high voltage electricity from the grid down to a lower
voltage for use in buildings via a transformer. Substations and
transformers can be located in the street, on poles or inside larger
buildings

Main switchboard (MSB)

Existing
switchboard
capacity
Space
heating

31

Cooking

EV
charging*
Demand
management and
energy efficiency
measures

Light + power

Annual peak electrical demand

A practical guide to electrification: For existing buildings

DHW

Dehum

Cooling

Located inside the building this is the hub from which the electricity
supply to the building is distributed to other switchboards and
includes circuit breakers, meters, power factor correction and other
controls.
This is the highest power load (measured in kW) that occurs in the
building at a moment in time during the year. It often occurs on the
hottest day of the year when all cooling systems are switched on. If
the peak electrical demand exceeds the electrical system capacity,
then it trips out the electrical supply. This is why systems are often
designed with lots of spare capacity that isn't used.

DHW

Cooking

Lifts and other
equipment
Fans +
pumps
Winter peak

* And any other new
electrical loads

Summer peak

Final peak demand

A practical guide to electrification: For existing buildings

32

Space and location
Converting an existing building to be all-electric will typically require
considering where the heat pumps for space heating and domestic
hot water can be installed. The location of the existing plant rooms will
influence what building modifications may be required.

Space and
location
considerations

1

Space for plant

Ventilation

Building structure

1. Plant on
roof
(external)

Roofs often have additional
space although need to
check height restrictions
and potential visual
impacts.

Natural ventilation is
typically easily achievable
on roofs.

Concrete roofs will
typically be able to support
the plant. Lightweight roofs
may require structural
strengthening.

2. Plant
room inside
building

Internal plant rooms may
need to be extended which
may not be practical.

If the plant room is on the
perimeter then additional
louvres may suffice to
provide adequate cross
ventilation. Internal plant
rooms may need to be
relocated or plenums
installed to provide
adequate ventilation.

Plant rooms will typically
have sufficient capacity,
but if the plant room is
extended to other parts of
the floor the structure will
need to be checked.

3. Plant
room in the
basement

As per 2

Providing adequate
ventilation to air source
heat pumps in basements
will often be a significant
challenge. Finding
alternative locations for the
heat pumps will typically
be necessary, although the
basement space can be
used for thermal storage.

As per 2

4. Plant
room
outside the
buildings

External space for plant is
highly dependent on the
building type and location.
Will be challenging in city
centre locations.

Natural ventilation is
typically easily achievable
in external locations.

Review the load
requirements and provide
appropriate foundations
and slabs.

2

4
3
Plant location opportunities and challenges

What else to
consider
when moving
the plant
room

If you need to relocate the heating hot water or domestic hot
water central plant then consider the following:
How will the plant be connected to the central reticulation
pipework?
Can the length of new pipework be minimised to reduce
pipework heat losses and pumping energy?

Notes
1.

Can distributed domestic hot water systems (or a hybrid
system of central and distributed) be adopted if there is
limited opportunity to find additional space?

A practical guide to electrification: For existing buildings

The table above provides generic advice. Each building is unique and requires detailed evaluation of the spatial and
ventilation requirements by a mechanical engineer, and a qualified structural engineer for structural requirements.

2. Changes to the building envelope (e.g. new louvres) or locating plant on the roof may require planning permission
and evaluation of potential visual and noise impacts on neighbours.

33

A practical guide to electrification: For existing buildings

34

Key electric features

Domestic
Hot water

Space
heating

Image credit:

Case study:
600 & 678
Victoria Street
Location
Melbourne, Vic
Sector
Commercial
Developer
Salta Properties
Consultant
Building-Performance

Additional buffer tanks were required for both upgrade projects
meaning that plant room space needed to be found and
structural support added.
Despite the challenges, upgrading the systems to electric
represents a significant step towards achieving net zero
operations for the buildings and owner, Salta Properties, has
had several other benefits, too.
The new system provides significant storage of both hot and
cold water which helps avoid the impacts of peak demand
periods. It also helps to enable the installation of photovoltaic
systems that will be added to the buildings over the coming
years to buffer future energy demands.
The projects have also been valuable in demonstrating how
retained assets and infrastructure will need to be managed and
upgraded in the future to meet a range of goals, including
optimal building performance.

Optimising assets for today and tomorrow
Planned lifecycle upgrades triggered a decision to replace chillers
and offset gas-powered boiler systems with heat pump systems at
600 and 678 Victoria Street in Richmond, Victoria. The buildings are
both multi-tenanted A-Grade commercial assets owned by Salta
Properties, one of Australia’s largest privately owned companies.
The upgrade projects were managed by Building-Performance.
"Achieving 100% electrification should be a priority for every
building, but we must also recognise that we can do this over a
period of time. Every gas asset should have a long-term strategy for
replacement and those approaching the end of their economic life
must be reviewed for how they can be electrified. This approach
creates a sustainable and economically sound route to
decarbonisation. These projects showed we have dramatically
minimised the dependency on gas through heat pump technology,
but we won't decommission boilers until the end of their economic
life," says founder of Building-Performance, Liam Murray.
Initially, the final temperature of the peak load system (less than 2%
of heating demand) will be achieved using boilers. This is because
the difference between water in the pipes and room temperature
(the delta T) with heat pumps is not large enough to use the
existing pipework. Within three years, both sites will decommission
their boilers and switch to electric calorifiers that will provide a high
temperature injection to help the peak load system reach the
required final temperature.

A practical guide to electrification: For existing buildings

35

Salta Properties is committed to
future proofing our assets and
mitigating risks, including the impacts
of a changing climate, for our tenants
and other stakeholders. All new
developments at Salta are fully
electric and electrification of our
existing assets has an important role
to play, starting with upgrading
existing systems such as those at 600
and 678 Victoria Street.
NIKKI PATON | Head of Sustainability and Operations Strategy, Salta Group

A practical guide to electrification: For existing buildings

36

Key electric features

Domestic
Hot water

Vicinity recognises that electrification will play a central role in
its decarbonisation journey (along with energy efficiency,
renewable energy and lastly, carbon offsets), so they are
currently investing in work that will help them to understand the
opportunities and challenges for electrifying their diverse
portfolio. Cundall are working with Vicinity to examine the
importance and benefits of electrifying their existing assets and
to develop feasibility studies for five different types of assets
represented in the portfolio. This includes heritage buildings,
small ‘neighbourhood’ shopping centres, larger regional
shopping centres and large ‘shed’ type centres, such as DFOs.

We are working with Cundall
to develop a bespoke
roadmap that will put
Vicinity in the best position
to integrate electrification
into capital expenditure
planning and to maximise
the opportunities that arise
in planning and budgeting
processes. We want to be
able to make the most of
every decision point for
both existing buildings and
new developments to
ensure we are electric
wherever possible.

The work will focus on what technology will be needed, space
requirements and cost estimates – all key considerations for
planning upgrades to existing assets.

MATEA ČEHOVIN | Sustainability Manager –
Environment, Vicinity Centres

Space
heating

Case study:
Vicinity Centres
Portfolio
Location
Australia
Sector
Retail
Developer
Vicinity Centres
Consultant
Cundall

Cooking
Vicinity Centres, one of Australia’s leading retail property groups
has 59 retails assets under management and a target of net
zero carbon emissions for the common mall areas of their
wholly-owned retail assets by 2030.

Having the right knowledge and resources to effectively engage
with tenants will be critical, particularly those in food and
hospitality where cooking with gas is currently the norm. This
work will help to inform internal and external stakeholders of the
importance of electrification and the benefits that it can deliver.

A practical guide to electrification: For existing buildings

37

A practical guide to electrification: For existing buildings

38

Image credit: 8 Chifley Square, David Clare, First Light Photography

Key electric features

Domestic
Hot water

Electrification projects can be more complex so stakeholders
involved in the decision making, planning and delivery of
projects should be involved as early as possible.
Despite the challenges, these projects are delivering significant
benefits. Not only are these upgrades an important step on the
journey to decarbonising Mirvac’s portfolio, they are also clearly
demonstrating the feasibility of electrification and generating
important learnings for subsequent projects.

Key benefits include:
Space
heating

Case study:
275 Kent Street
and 8 Chifley
Square
Location
Sydney, NSW
Sector
Commercial
Developer
Mirvac

In 2014, Mirvac set an ambitious target to be net positive in
carbon by 2030 for our scope 1 and 2 emissions.
But targets aren’t much without a plan. So, in 2019 we published
Planet Positive - Carbon, our approach to help us reach this
goal.
In 2021, Mirvac reached its net positive carbon target nine years
early, by maximising energy efficiency, purchasing renewable
electricity, investing in a small amount of high-quality,
community focussed carbon offsets and progressing
electrification across our portfolios.
When the end of trip (EoT) facilities at 275 Kent Street and 8
Chifley Square were due to be enhanced, there was a key focus
on avoiding gas use for hot water and instead using an electric
heat pump which aligned with our electrification strategy.
However, there were a few challenges to overcome.
Firstly, space availability. At 275 Kent Street, the heat pumps
were installed next to the EoT in a dedicated plant room, but at
8 Chifley Square, a car park space had to be sacrificed as there
was insufficient plant room space close to the EoT facilities.
Value is also a key consideration. Heat pump systems typically
have higher purchase and installation costs requiring additional
funds to be committed in capital expenditure budgets, but any
additional costs need to be considered in the context of future
proofing assets rather than a narrow return on investment
focus.

A practical guide to electrification: For existing buildings

39

•

Removing fossil fuel use and the associated carbon
emissions from the operation of the EoT facilities at 275
Kent Street and 8 Chifley Square.

•

At 275 Kent Street data shows that the heat pumps are
already realising operational cost savings.

•

Modelling is underway for replacing gas systems with heat
pumps for entire buildings with indications of more
operational cost savings to be made.

•

Future proofing assets and reducing carbon offset
requirements.

By designing, creating and managing high
quality, energy efficient buildings operating
on renewable energy, we not only reduce
our own emissions and impact, but we can
also demonstrate the benefits of working
as a ‘force for good’, inspiring and
influencing others to do the same.
DAVID PALIN | Sustainability Manager, Mirvac

A practical guide to electrification: For existing buildings

40

Key electric features

Space
heating

Case study:
QuadReal
Property
Group
Location
International, Canada
Sector
Commercial, Industrial,
Residential
Developer
QuadReal Property
Group

QuadReal reduces reliance on carbon through
innovative assessment
QuadReal Property Group is a global real estate investment,
operating and development company headquartered in Vancouver,
Canada, with a growing portfolio of real estate assets in Australia,
as well other countries around the world. Currently, there is a
portfolio wide effort underway to reduce QuadReal’s carbon
footprint and dramatically increase energy performance.

Turning data into solutions
At one of QuadReal’s office buildings, Park Place in Vancouver, the
Building Operations team conducted energy studies which
indicated the property’s energy usage and costs could be reduced
with the installation of a heat recovery system. Two heat recovery
chillers were installed to allow waste heat from the cooling systems
to be captured and re-used to heat other parts of the building. The
heat recovery chillers act as heat pumps to deliver heating, a
process that significantly reduces water usage, steam consumption
and greenhouse gas emissions. The system delivers an annual
energy cost saving of over $110,000 AUD.
Commerce Court, an iconic, multi-building complex in the heart of
Toronto’s financial district is connected to a district energy loop
project that uses deep lake water for cooling. Recently, while
assessing the buildings natural gas-based heating equipment that
was coming to its end-of-life, the team began searching for a low
carbon solution.

A practical guide to electrification: For existing buildings

41

QuadReal proposes to utilise the waste heat loop from the
district cooling system and through on-site heat pumps
upgrade the heat to provide all the heating needed for over a
million square feet of office space at Commerce Court. This
would reduce the annual carbon emissions of the complex by
6,000 tonnes.
These are just two examples of how QuadReal is evaluating its
portfolio, reducing its overall carbon footprint and working
towards its goal of building better, smarter and more
sustainable properties.

As a part of our
commitment to reducing
our environmental footprint
we invest in innovative
solutions. One innovation is
to track all-natural gas
using equipment in our
energy management
software and begin zero
carbon pathway
assessments three years
ahead of end of life of that
gas equipment. We project
this will double our pace of
portfolio carbon reduction
from 2% per year to 4% per
year.
JAMIE GRAY-DONALD | Senior Vice President,
Sustainability & Environmental, Health & Safety,
QuadReal

A practical guide to electrification: For existing buildings

42

Key electric features

Domestic
Hot water

Space
heating

Case study:
Kawakawa,
Dargaville &
Kaitaia
hospitals
Location
Northland, New Zealand
Sector
Health
Developer
Te Whatu Ora Health
New Zealand – Te Tai
Tokerau (formerly the
Northland District Health
Board)

Dargaville hospital is expected to save $111,000 on energy costs
and $41,600 on maintenance. Kaitaia expected to save $89,000
on annual energy costs and $53,900 on maintenance. Diesel
savings at both hospitals was 282,000 litres, leading to a carbon
saving of 794 tonnes a year representing a reduction in carbon
emissions of over 70% prior thanks to the electrification
projects.
Aside from the clear financial benefits, the electrification
projects have gone a long way towards reducing the use of
stationary diesel on the three sites and in turn significantly
reducing carbon emissions.

Te Whatu Ora Te Tai Tokerau has committed to halving their
emissions by 2030 from their 2016 baseline and to reach Net Zero
carbon emissions before 2050.
As part of its decarbonisation strategy, Te Whatu Ora replaced a
centralised diesel boiler at Kawakawa hospital with modern heat
pumps. This electrification project was so successful that the
boilers at Dargaville and Kaitaia hospitals quickly followed suit.
Each new system can operate independently, providing each
building with its own source of domestic hot water and heating with
the replacement of the old diesel boilers resulting in immediate
energy savings. The energy performance of the 3 hospitals
improved from over 300 kWh/m2 per year to between 111 and 182
kWh/m2 per year representing a 40% to 60% reduction in energy
consumption.
The heat pumps can be adjusted in response to seasonal variations,
building occupancy and the fact that not all wards are open day
and night.
The electrification also meant that the steam reticulation pipes to
the boilers could also be removed – a common source of energy
and carbon savings as these pipes continuously lose heat.

A practical guide to electrification: For existing buildings

35

A practical guide to electrification: For existing buildings

36

Key electric features

Domestic
Hot water

Space
heating

Case study:
22 The Terrace
Location
Wellington, New
Zealand
Sector
Commercial
Developer
Stride Property Group

To support the increased electrical load, the main switchboard,
already at the end of its economic life, was upgraded along with
a new sub-main installed to support the new air source heat
pumps located on the roof of the building. The existing
transformer was able to be reused with careful assessment of
the electrical loads and the installation of a load management
system for the EV charging infrastructure which adjusts the rate
of EV charging in real time to keep the transformer loading
within the existing capacity.
This project demonstrates how recycling existing building stock
can minimise life cycle carbon emissions from upfront and
operational carbon emissions through strategic retrofit and
electrification of the existing fossil fuelled infrastructure. This
building highlights that electrification is not the preserve of
Premium and A-Grade assets but is a sound portfolio strategy
across all parts of the building market.

The revitalisation of 22 The Terrace demonstrates how a seismic
strengthening project of a stereotypical commercial building in New
Zealand can represent an opportune time to significantly improve
the building’s environmental performance and decarbonise building
operations through electrification.
22 The Terrace is a late 1980’s office building which received a full
building refurbishment, including:
Earthquake strengthening to 100% new building standard
(NBS) to improve the building resilience.
Upgrade of the building thermal envelope to reduce heating
and cooling loads and improve thermal comfort.
Replacement of the existing gas boilers with all electric
heating and domestic hot water heat pumps.
Sustainability consultants Beca carried out a comprehensive review
of energy efficiency initiatives to inform the Green Star and
NABERSNZ 5 Star strategy. This helped steer the services design
away from the existing fossil fuel infrastructure towards new energy
efficient electric air source heat pumps. The removal of all fossil
fuelled systems from the building, new energy efficient HVAC and
lighting systems, and retrofit to the building thermal envelope,
resulted in an estimated 73% reduction in annual operational
carbon emissions.

A practical guide to electrification: For existing buildings

35

A practical guide to electrification: For existing buildings

36

Restaurants and
chefs recognise
the value of
induction
cooking

Image credit: Kate Longley, Breathe Architecture

Stokehouse chef, Jason Staudt, welcomes the
shift saying "the combination of cooking over
wood, with the cleanliness and sustainability of
induction is absolutely the future".
"As much as I love gas, induction has advanced
in so many ways. It's more powerful, the
cleaning is easier, and the cooking is more
accurate.”
JASON STAUDT | Chef, Stokehouse, ‘No longer cooking with
gas: how a shift to induction cooking could affect Victorian
homes and restaurants’, Good Food Online, May 11, 2021

We use induction cooktops in the kitchens at Rockpool Bar & Grill, Spice
Temple and Rosetta," says Neil Perry. "They're far easier to clean down
after use, which is one of the main reasons we chose induction over gas.
With induction you're no longer a slave to an incredibly dirty gas stove top
with multiple fittings that have to cool down and be dismantled ahead of
cleaning. There is far more elbow grease involved when cleaning a gas top.”
NEIL PERRY | Chef, ‘Gas v induction cooktops’ what is your pick? Good Food Online,
May 3, 2017

A practical guide to electrification: For existing buildings

43

Image credit: Kate Longley, Breathe Architecture

Greater energy efficiency means kitchens save money not only on the
cost of fuel, but on air conditioning too. For Wakuda, the higher costs
of installation have been offset by the lower cost of ownership. “We
have a safer, cooler, more energy efficient kitchen,” he says.
TETSUYA WAKUDA | Chef, Tetsuya, ‘Electric currents’, Restaurant & catering,
December 13, 2016

“If I had the choice, all of our
restaurants would be
induction only, there's no
difference in the quality of
food you can produce.
Unfortunately, many of the
buildings our restaurants sit in
did not have the foundations
for induction cooking because
they're so old.”

“It [induction cooking] is a new
thing for me, but the idea is to
have an ambient kitchen.”
says chef, Martin Benn. “Gas
stoves makes the kitchen go
really hot, but we want to have
more of an ambient 24°C so
the chefs aren’t too hot when
cooking and the food stays at
the right temperature.”

NATHAN TOLEMAN | CEO, Mulberry
Group, ‘No longer cooking with gas:
how a shift to induction cooking could
affect Victorian homes & restaurants’,
Good Food Online, May 11, 2021

MARTIN BENN | Chef, Society, ‘Cooking
up a dream kitchen: Martin Benn’s
Society restaurant in Melbourne’, The
Australian,
May 7, 2021

A practical guide to electrification: For existing buildings

44

Marketing an
all-electric
building

Investors
An all-electric building is ready for the decarbonisation of the
electricity grid, particularly if the building is also highly efficient and
powered by renewables. A building that achieves these is likely to be
aligned with the latest science and recommendations from the
following organisations:
The Intergovernmental Panel for Climate Change (IPCC)
International Energy Agency’s net zero roadmap (IEA)
Taskforce for Climate-related Financial Disclosures (TCFD)
This building would also likely be aligned with the requirements of the
Climate Bonds Initiative, particularly if it has also achieved a 6 Star
Green Star Performance rating.
The reason why an all-electric building is aligned with these
frameworks is simple – the building features no fossil fuels and has the
capacity to draw its entire energy from renewable electricity generated
in Australia.

Induction cooktops are also quicker to clean at the end of the
day. There is no waiting for cooktops to cool down then
scrubbing burners and lining with foil. Factor in the labour cost
savings when preparing a business case.
Induction cooktops can be used as extra workspace for food
preparation when not being used for cooking. They can also be
used for multiple types of cooking due to the ability to control to
set temperatures, reducing the need for specialist equipment.
Smaller back of house allows for more front of house space, so
there is an opportunity for more sales.
Retail and commercial electric kitchens will become standard over the
next few years as the market changes. Your existing building should be
ready to assist tenants who are on this journey.

Corporate and government tenants
An all-electric building has many features that make it valuable for
corporate and government tenants. In addition to the above, and as
noted elsewhere in the guide, all electric-buildings:
Enable the tenants to use 100% renewable electricity, which is the
best mechanism they can use to meet their net zero carbon
targets. This also reduces their climate-related risks and supports
reporting on property emissions and transition strategies.
Reduce pollution in our towns and cities and provide healthier and
safer workspaces in kitchens.
Align with the expectations set by GBCA’s Climate Positive
Pathway for new buildings and meet the latest Green Star
Performance requirements for energy sourcing in existing
buildings (see here).

Marketing
all-electric
kitchens to
domestic
buyers and
retail tenants

Retail tenants
The new generation of all-electric kitchens deliver many benefits:
Commercial kitchens are often hot, noisy environments with lots
of activity and stress. Induction cooktops put much less heat,
noise and air pollutants into the kitchen than gas burners helping
create calmer, quieter and cooler workplaces for kitchen workers.
Energy consumption is lower. When a pan is lifted from an
induction cooktop the energy consumption stops. Lower heat
means reduced energy for ventilation and cooling of the kitchen.

A practical guide to electrification: For existing buildings

45

Domestic buyers and tenants
For many years cooking with gas has been marketed as a sales feature
for houses and apartments creating customer expectations for gas in
the kitchen. But consumer attitude is changing, providing an
opportunity to capitalise on the many benefits for induction cooking.
Messages to consider:
Induction kitchens are healthier, safer, and give you more
control.
Gas stovetops emit toxic gases that can increase asthma and
respiratory illnesses similar to the impact of passive smoking.
Exhaust fans don’t get rid of all of these, so avoid the problem
altogether and use induction.
Ever wondered why your kitchen is so hot? Natural gas kitchens
heat the air, not just your food. Your new induction cooktop gives
you great control as all the heat goes where it should – your pan.
You’ll save money on bills as your induction cooktop is more
efficient.
Your induction cooktop is safer for children as the surface of an
induction cooktop does not stay hot! Much less chance of
burning small hands on the stove.
Your cooktop is also an extra flat surface that you can use to
prepare food on when not cooking, and cleaning it is a breeze.
You can cook anything on it. World-class chefs of all cuisines are
moving to all-electric kitchens. They can do it - so can you!
A practical guide to electrification: For existing buildings

46

Green Star
and allelectric
buildings

Launched by GBCA in 2003, Green Star is an internationally
recognised rating system setting the standard for healthy, resilient,
positive buildings and places. In summary, Green Star aims to:
Reduce the impact of climate change

NABERS and
all-electric
buildings

Enhance our health and quality of life

Energy

Restore and protect our planet’s biodiversity and ecosystems

Water

Drive resiliency in buildings, fitouts, and communities

Waste
Indoor environment

Contribute to market transformation and a sustainable
economy.

A Climate
Positive Built
Environment

NABERS is a simple, reliable sustainability rating for the built
environment. Like the efficiency star ratings that you get on your
fridge or washing machine, NABERS provides a rating from one to
six stars for buildings efficiency across:

This helps building owners to understand their building’s actual
measured performance compared to other similar buildings,
providing a benchmark for progress.

Green Star Performance v2, introduced in 2022, aims to deliver
healthy, resilient, and positive places for people and nature, built
responsibly, and showcasing leadership. Key to the rating tool is
delivering buildings that meet or exceed what is required to meet a
1.5°C trajectory. To achieve this, Green Star Performance v2
introduced requirements for buildings to transition to be ‘Climate
Positive’ which includes being fossil fuel free with no natural gas for
space heating, domestic hot water and cooking.

Supporting
Australia’s net
zero transition

Emissions factors, also known as the National Greenhouse
Accounts (NGA) factors, are used in NABERS Energy ratings to
enable the comparison of the emissions associated with the use of
different energy sources. The emissions related to grid electricity
use have been falling year-on-year with the increased amount of
renewable energy in the grid.

To get a world-leading 6 Star rating, any building in operations must
be fossil fuel free by 2026. This requirement will apply to 5 Star
ratings by 2030, with all ratings to be fossil fuel free by 2040.

To ensure that NABERS Energy ratings accurately reflect
the latest emissions related to different energy
sources, NABERS updated the emissions factors used to calculate
NABERS Energy ratings for all building types in July 2021.

The requirement is part of Green Star Performance’s Climate
Positive Pathway.

After the initial July 2021 update, the NGA factors will be reviewed
and updated periodically. The next update is scheduled for 2025.
To enable users to calculate the NABERS rating using the updated
NGA factors, a rating prediction tool is available on the NABERS
website. Users can predict future NABERS ratings using projected
emissions factors.

By 2026

buildings that seek
this rating

Must be fossil fuel
free

By 2030

buildings that seek
this rating

Must be fossil fuel
free

By 2035

buildings that seek
this rating

Must be fossil fuel
free

By 2040

buildings that seek
any rating

1-3

Based on these changes, all-electric buildings should be able to
achieve their desired rating, as NABERS is now using more
accurate, lower factors for electricity than it used to.
From 2023, NABERS will introduce a Renewable Energy Indicator26,
which will transparently disclose the amount of renewable energy
used by a building. Only all electric buildings running on 100%
renewables will able to get 100% on the indicator.

Must be fossil fuel
free

A practical guide to electrification: For existing buildings

47

AApractical
practicalguide
guideto
toelectrification:
electrification:For
Forexisting
existingbuildings
buildings

48

Other
frameworks
promoting
electrification

In addition to Green Star and NABERS, other
international frameworks will drive the delivery of allelectric existing buildings rapidly. These are the top
three.

Climate Bonds
Initiative

Climate Bonds Initiative (CBI) is an investor-focused not-for-profit,
working to mobilise global capital for climate action. It administers the
Climate Bonds Certification Scheme.
In 2021, CBI approved two of the GBCA’s rating tools as compliant
with green bonds certification under the Climate Bonds Standard.
Green Star was recognised because the rating system is driving
highly efficient, fossil fuel free buildings powered by renewables.

Science Based
Targets Initiative
(SBTI)

The Science Based Targets Initiative (SBTi) is part of the ‘We Mean
Business’ coalition, a partnership between the United Nations Global
Compact, World Resources Institute (WRI) and the World Wide Fund
for Nature (WWF) and Climate Disclosure Project (CDP).
SBTi has begun publishing guidance on net zero claims. Key to this
guidance is the need to decommission or not install fossil fuel
infrastructure. All-electric buildings are in line with this guidance.

GRESB

GRESB is an investor-driven organisation committed to assessing the
ESG performance of real assets globally. More than 200 members, of
which nearly 60 are pension funds and their fiduciaries, use the
GRESB data in their investment management and engagement
process, with a clear goal to optimise the risk/return profile of their
investments.
GRESB has indicated over the past few years an interest in driving
better performing assets. GRESB has highlighted that driving assets
to net zero carbon is a key concern. All-electric buildings will have a
better opportunity to perform in this space in the future.

A practical guide to electrification: For existing buildings

49

practicalguide
guidetotoelectrification:
electrification:For
Forexisting
existingbuildings
buildings
AApractical

50

Myths and
barriers

We interviewed many stakeholders. These are
answers to common questions we heard.

Using electricity isn’t
greener – we’re still
burning coal

The purpose of electrifying buildings is two-fold: enable use of onsite and off-site renewables, and to ensure we aren’t locking in
fossil fuel infrastructure for decades to come. Consider that
electricity networks are decarbonising more rapidly than the most
optimistic projections. By 2030, 82% of the electricity market is
projected to be renewables – it doesn’t make sense to finish a
building in the next few years that will be using carbon intensive
fossil fuels for the next 20+ years.

What about green
hydrogen?

Transforming the gas network and buildings to use 100% green
hydrogen or biofuels is typically more difficult than adding
renewables to the electricity grid.
Much of the current gas network would need to be replaced to
carry 100% hydrogen (or it would leak, as the hydrogen molecules
are smaller than methane), and buildings in the network would
need to have their equipment replaced prior to switching over to
hydrogen.
It also takes three times27 as many renewables to create green
hydrogen as it does to power something with electricity. While
hydrogen production will become more efficient with new
technologies being developed, there will still likely be an energy
loss compared to direct electrification through renewables.
Over the longer term, in certain locations with large seasonal
heating loads, green hydrogen may be competitive when factoring
in peak demands on the electricity grid. This will only occur if the
production of green hydrogen becomes more efficient and costs
come down. For now, a better use for hydrogen and biofuels is in
sectors that cannot easily electrify, like manufacturing.

What about green
gas?

There is very limited supply of biogas into the national gas grid
and this is unlikely to change in the foreseeable future. Like
hydrogen, it’s better to use biofuels in manufacturing, processes
and transport.

What about carbon
offsets?

Offsets should only be used as a last resort after all practical direct
emissions reduction measures have been implemented. Most net
zero carbon standards will not allow offsets for natural gas in new
buildings. With increased demand, the price of offsets can be
expected to increase compared to the cost of generating
renewable electricity which is decreasing.

A practical guide to electrification: For existing buildings

51

The cost of heating
with electricity is
more than with gas

There are three factors to consider that affect costs: equipment
efficiency, connection fees, and running costs. Heat pumps are
significantly more efficient than gas boilers and heaters, making
electric options increasingly more competitive. While gas and
electricity prices can fluctuate, removing gas means that you are
avoiding connection costs and gas servicing and safety check
costs. A well-designed electric system can also take advantage of
lower electricity prices at different times of day to heat water to be
used at a later time.

We don't have the
space for all electric
design

This can be a challenge in existing buildings but there is usually a
solution to be found. See Space and location section and the case
studies.

The technology
isn't sufficiently
mature

Heat pumps and induction equipment have been around for many
years, are technically robust and readily available. Induction
cooking is becoming increasingly common in Europe and Asia.
With the increase in demand the pace of innovation is only likely
to increase further.

The electrical
infrastructure
capacity isn't large
enough to
accommodate all
electric design

The increased electrical demand associated with switching from
natural gas will depend on the size, location, system design and
use of the building. Adding all electric systems, combined with
demand management controls can avoid having to upgrade the
electrical supply to the building.

Tenants and home
owners only want
gas

As induction cooktops become more common, their benefits to
users and building occupants are becoming more widely
appreciated – better control, safer, easier to clean, less heat in
space and better air quality. As more people become familiar with
induction, the perception that gas is the best way to cook will
change.

Electric cooking
isn’t as controllable
particularly in
commercial
kitchens

Induction cooking is faster (up to 60% more efficient energy
transfer) and provides instant response to changes in controls.
There are far more choices becoming available as more
equipment comes to market, technologies evolve to meet
consumer expectations and training on how to adapt to different
equipment is provided. Leading chefs agree, with induction
cooktops increasingly used in their restaurants.

Induction woks are
not commercially
available in
Australia

Demand for high power induction woks for Asian cooking is
increasing in Australia. Many leading suppliers are looking at
options to import them from the UK and China to meet this
demand. As demand increases, so will availability.
A practical guide to electrification: For existing buildings

52

Operational rating
tools penalise
switching to allelectric

Green Star Performance rewards making buildings fossil fuel free.
It is also introducing mandatory requirements for buildings
targeting 6 star to be fully electric by 2026 and has announced
requirements for the other star ratings that will stagger over time
between now and 2040.
Higher NABERS Energy ratings were, until 2021, harder to achieve
with electric heat pumps than with gas boilers. The 2022 revision
of the carbon coefficients for grid electricity will reduce this
impact. These will be updated regularly and reflect grid
decarbonisation in each state and territory.

I run the risk of
breaking my NABERS
ratings lease
requirements if I
electrify!

Based on the latest update to NABERS, this will be unlikely if the
refurbishment is carried through carefully. Furthermore,
electrifying a building is something that you should undertake
over time, and part of that undertaking is to engage with your
tenants about the benefits of electrification as part of net zero
carbon strategy.

I have to have natural
gas to my building –
it’s the law!

There are no mandatory requirements in Australia to connect a
building to the natural gas network. The last jurisdiction, ACT,
removed this requirement from their planning legislation in 2019.
Victoria’s Gas Substitution Roadmap outlines changes to the
Victoria Planning Provisions to remove gas connection
requirements for new residential subdivisions.

Should I keep using
gas now and convert
later?

If the opportunity to electrify exists now, take it! The benefits of
electrification are significant, from health to climate. Also, costs for
electric equipment are coming down as the technology has
become more mature. Finally, investor, tenant and consumer
preferences are shifting. The question that you should be asking
is, why haven’t I electrified yet?

A practical guide to electrification: For existing buildings

53

AApractical
practicalguide
guidetotoelectrification:
electrification:For
Forexisting
existingbuildings
buildings

54

Appendix:
terminology
Carbon offset

Emission
scopes

GWP

Hydrogen

Renewable
energy

Terminology to use when making claims
A carbon offset refers to a mechanism that is used to compensate for
GHG emissions that occur elsewhere. Australia’s Climate Active
program has clear rules as to what constitutes an eligible offset. Offsets
are considered a measure of last resort – they should be used to
address unavoidable emissions such as some Scope 3 emissions.
Natural gas use in buildings is not considered unavoidable.
A mechanism for classifying different sources of GHG emissions used
in carbon accounting28. There are three ‘scopes’:
Scope 1 covers direct emissions from owned or controlled
sources. In a building this is typically emissions from burning
fossil fuels (e.g. diesel, natural gas and LPG) and leakage of
fluorinated gases such as refrigerants.
Scope 2 covers indirect emissions from the consumption of
purchased electricity, steam, heating and cooling.
Scope 3 covers activities not owned or controlled by the
reporting organisation. This includes production of fuels,
electricity transmission losses, embodied carbon in construction
and maintenance (including materials and products), tenant
energy consumption, waste treatment, water treatment and travel
to/from the building.

Net zero carbon
A net zero carbon building is one where there is a balance between the
amount of greenhouse gas produced and the amount removed from the
atmosphere on a net annual basis. It is a technical, though open-ended
term. Its use must be accompanied by the focus on emissions, e.g. net zero
in operations, net zero for construction, etc.
Net zero claims are often unverified, and there is no agreed standard that
defines them for buildings at this stage.

Carbon neutral
A carbon neutral building, as defined in the Australian
Government’s Climate Active standard30, is a building that:
Meets an energy consumption target

Global Warming Potential (GWP) is a measure of the energy 1 tonne of
a greenhouse gas will absorb over 100 years compared to the
emissions of 1 tonne of carbon dioxide (CO2). The GWP of CO2 is 1.
GWP of natural gas is 28.

Measures water consumption and operational waste

Hydrogen is a fuel that can be used to generate heat or electricity
through combustion (similar to gas) or used in fuel cells to create
electricity through a chemical process. There are three common ways
to produce hydrogen fuel:
Green hydrogen, produced from renewable energy. It is the only
form of hydrogen that can be considered low carbon.
Blue hydrogen, produced from fossil fuels whose emissions have
been captured. This is untested technology at scale and lifecycle
studies29 have shown it to be emissions intensive due to fugitive
emissions.
Grey or brown hydrogen, produced from fossil fuels. Emissions
intensive and the most common type of hydrogen.

Climate Active Carbon Neutral claims are third party verified.

Calculates its emissions based on the above information
Uses renewable energy and/or eligible carbon offsets to settle its
carbon account to zero.

Climate Positive
The Climate Positive pathway31 in Green Star Performance requires buildings
to:
Meet an energy consumption target.

Renewable energy is any source of energy that can be used without
depleting its reserves including sunlight or solar energy, wind, wave,
biomass, and hydro energy. They are generally classified as on-site
renewable energy (where the generator is connected behind the
meter), or off-site (where the generator supplies to the grid and this
electricity is procured). Off-site procurement is a valid method of
procuring renewables through a contract that produces large
generation certificates (LGC) that can be traced and have been retired
to the regulator. More information can be found here.

A practical guide to electrification: For existing buildings

Be fossil fuel free for space heating, domestic hot water and cooking.
Purchase 100% renewable electricity (scope 2 GHG).
Purchase nature based offsets* for refrigerants and defined scope 3
emissions.
Green Star Climate Positive claims are verified by an independent third party
assessment process.
* these have to be eligible under Climate Active, but are limited to nature based offsets or similar carbon
removal offsets. More information can be found here.

55

A practical guide to electrification: For existing buildings

56

Appendix:
references

1 IPCC. (2021) Climate Change 2021: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of

Working Group I to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change. https://www.ipcc.ch/assessment-report/ar6/

2 ASBEC. (2022). Rapid and Least Cost Decarbonisation of Building Operations

Discussion Paper. https://www.asbec.asn.au/wordpress/wpcontent/uploads/2022/02/ASBEC-Decarbonisation-Discussion-Paper-1.pdf

3 European Commission. (2021, 2 November). Launch by United States, the European

Union, and Partners of the Global Methane Pledge to Keep 1.5C Within Reach.
Retrieved January 28, 2022, from
https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/statement_21_5766

4 IEA. (2021). Net Zero by 2050. Paris https://www.iea.org/reports/net-zero-by-2050
5 Australian Government. (2021, October). Australia’s emissions projections

2021. https://www.industry.gov.au/sites/default/files/October%202021/document/au
stralias_emissions_projections_2021_0.pdf

6 ACT Government. (2022, August). Powering Canberra: Our Pathway to Electrification.

https://www.climatechoices.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0009/2052477/Poweri
ng-Canberra-Our-Pathway-to-Electrification-ACT-Government-Position-Paper.pdf

7 McCarthy, A. (2021, 30 August). Sustainability-Linked Debt Financing: The View from

Down Under. Sustainalytics.com. Retrieved January 28, 2022, from
https://www.sustainalytics.com/esg-research/resource/corporate-esgblog/sustainability-linked-debt-financing-the-view-from-down-under

15 Australian Government. (2017). Human health risks associated with surface handling

of chemicals used in coal seam gas extraction in Australia.
https://www.awe.gov.au/water/coal-and-coal-seam-gas/publications/humanhealth-risks-of-chemicals-associated-withcsg-extraction-in-Australia

16 Retzer, K. et al. (2018, 24 August). Gases and vapors continue to pose hazards on oil

and gas well sites during gauging, fluid transfer, and disposal. NIOSH Science Blog
https://blogs.cdc.gov/niosh-science-blog/2018/08/24/oil-and-gas-vapors/

17 Climate Council of Australia. (2021). Kicking the gas habit: How gas is harming our

health. Climate Council of Australia. https://www.climatecouncil.org.au/wpcontent/uploads/2021/05/Kicking-the-Gas-Habit-How-Gas-is-Harming-ourHealth.pdf

18 Eric D. Lebel, Colin J. Finnegan, Zutao Ouyang, and Robert B. Jackson. (2022).

Methane and NOx Emissions from Natural Gas Stoves, Cooktops, and Ovens in
Residential Homes, Environmental Science
& Technology. https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.est.1c04707

19 Australian Academy of Science. (2019, 19 July). Air pollution—what’s the situation?

https://www.science.org.au/curious/people-medicine/air-pollution-whats-situation

20 World Green Build Council. (2021). The Net Zero Carbon Buildings

Commitment. https://www.worldgbc.org/thecommitment

21 Science Based Targets Initiative. (2021). Companies taking action.

https://sciencebasedtargets.org/companies-taking-action

8 Charter Hall. (2021, November 22). Charter Hall funds $500 million sustainability-linked

loan. Corporate. https://www.charterhall.com.au/News/newsarticle/2021/11/22/charter-hall-funds-500-million-sustainability-linked-loan

9 Climate Bonds Initiative. (2021, 25 November)Cimate Bonds Initiative recognises

Green Star as a pathway to net zero buildings: Two new proxies available for
Certification under
the Low Carbon Buildings Criteria.
https://www.climatebonds.net/resources/
press-releases/2021/11/climate-bonds-initiative-recognises-green-star-pathway-netzero

10 European Commission. (2020, 7 March). EU taxonomy for sustainable activities.

https://ec.europa.eu/info/business-economy-euro/banking-and-finance/sustainablefinance/eu-taxonomy-sustainable-activities_en

11 GBCA. (2021a). Future in focus: Resilience in the built environment.

https://new.gbca.org.au/green-star/green-star-strategy/resilience-builtenvironment

12 TCFD. (2017, June). Recommendations of the Task Force on Climate-related

Financial Disclosures. https://assets.bbhub.io/company/sites/60/2021/10/FINAL2017-TCFD-Report.pdf

13 EY. (2020, July). How will ESG performance shape your future?

https://assets.ey.com/content/dam/ey-sites/eycom/en_gl/topics/assurance/assurance-pdfs/ey-global-institutional-investorsurvey-2020.pdf

22 RE100. (2021). Members. https://www.there100.org/re100-members
23 GBCA. (2021b). GBCA’s Climate Positive Pathway for Existing Buildings.

https://gbca-web.s3.amazonaws.com/media/documents/climate-positive-pathwayfor-existing-buildings-discussion-paper.pdf

24 ASBEC. (2019). Growing the market for sustainable homes.

https://www.asbec.asn.au/wordpress/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/190701ASBEC-CRCLCL-Growing-Market-for-Sustainable-Homes-web.pdf

25 United Nations Environment Program. (2016). The Montreal Protocol.

https://www.unep.org/ozonaction/who-we-are/about-montreal-protocol

26 NABERS. (2021). Renewable Energy Indicator.

https://www.nabers.gov.au/publications/nabers-release-renewable-energyindicator

27 IRENA. (2020). Green Hydrogen: A guide to policy making.

https://www.irena.org//media/Files/IRENA/Agency/Publication/2020/Nov/IRENA_Green_hydrogen_polic
y_2020.pdf

28 As defined in the Greenhouse Gas Protocol.

World Resources Institute & World Business Council for Sustainable Development.
(2015). The Greenhouse Gas Protocol – A Corporate Accounting and Reporting
Standard. https://ghgprotocol.org/sites/default/files/standards/ghg-protocolrevised.pdf

29 Howarth, R. W. (2021, 1 October). How green is blue hydrogen? Wiley Online Library.

https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1002/ese3.956

14 Australian Energy Regulator. (2021). State of the energy market 2021.

https://www.aer.gov.au/system/files/State%20of%20the%20energy%20market%202
021%20-%20Full%20report_1.pdf

30 Climate Active. (2022). https://www.climateactive.org.au/
31 GBCA. (2021c). Climate Positive Buildings and our Net Zero Ambitions.

https://new.gbca.org.au/green-star/green-star-strategy/carbon-climatechange/#net-zero-ambitions

A practical guide to electrification: For existing buildings

57

A practical guide to electrification: For existing buildings

58

Acknowledgements
GBCA would like to
acknowledge and
thank the following
organisations for
their contribution to
the delivery of this
guide.

Better Buildings
Partnership
Building-Performance
Colliers
Investa Property Group
Mirvac
NABERS

North Sydney Council
Property Council of
Australia
QuadReal Property
Group
Salta Properties
Vicinity Centres

Delivery team
Jorge Chapa – Head of Market Transformation
Taryn Cornell – Senior Manager Green Star Strategy &
Development
Rebecca Pettit – Program Lead
David Clark – Consultant (Positive Zero)
David Collins – Director

Co-developed with the support of the CEFC

Proudly funded by the NSW Government

GBCA would like
to thank our
Climate Positive
Partners for their
ongoing support.

A practical guide to electrification: For existing buildings

59

A practical guide to electrification: For existing buildings

