The future is electric:
A practical guide for
grid-optimised
precincts

positivezero

A practical guide for grid-optimised precincts

A practical guide for grid-optimised precincts

1

Established in 2002, Green Building Council of Australia (GBCA)
is the nation’s authority on sustainable buildings, communities
and cities. Our vision is for healthy, resilient and positive places
for people. Our purpose is to lead the sustainable transformation
of the built environment. GBCA represents more than 550
individual companies with a combined annual turnover of more
than $46 billion.

Technical partner

positivezero

Positive Zero was founded in 2022 by David Clark to provide
independent sustainability advice, guidance, training and
technical solutions to clients in the property sector.

Funding partner
Boundless uses the levers of philanthropy, investment and
direct advocacy to make change and get Australia on the path
to becoming a renewable energy superpower by 2030.

With thanks to

We would like to thank the following people for providing
advice and insight int the development of this guide:
•

Gabrielle Kuiper – DER Expert

•

Karen Greaves - Lendlease

•

Paul Himberger - Landcom

•

Iris Bua – Endeavour Energy

•

David West – Sourced Energy

•

Tosh Szatow, Simon Evans – Flow Power

•

Gerard Healey – University of Melbourne

•

Jane Keddie – Hanson Partnerships

•

Simon Carter, Florian Richard - ESR

GBCA would like to
thank our Climate
Positive Partners for
their ongoing support.

A practical guide for grid-optimised precincts

A practical guide for grid-optimised precincts

How to use
this guide

This guide outlines the key steps and principles to deliver new allelectric precincts. It discusses current technologies options, and how
to prepare for the transition to electric vehicles (EVs), energy storage
and a more dynamic renewable electricity grid. If you are a precinct
owner, developer, planner, government official or consulting
professional, this guide is for you.

Decarbonising
precincts

These are the primary issues to address to decarbonize precincts. For
buildings refer to our other Practical guides to electrification available on our
website.

Standard precinct
Gas infrastructure to buildings.
Electricity connection to grid.

Introduction

This guide

Introduction ● Precincts covered by this guide ● The right solution today
● Stakeholders and key roles

From today’s precincts to the precincts of the future
Typical precincts, all-electric precincts, and grid-interactive precincts
● Stakeholders, roles, considerations and opportunities

Fossil fuel free
Eliminate gas and LPG in the
precinct for stationary energy.
Use alternatives to diesel back-up
power. Use low-GWP refrigerants.

Design considerations in grid-interactive precincts
Planning for an all-electric precinct ● Precinct energy infrastructure ● Peak energy
management ● On-site renewable opportunities ● Electric vehicle infrastructure
● Battery storage ● Other forms of storage ● planning for all-electric buildings

Highly efficient and flexible
Reduce electricity consumption and
peak demand in the precinct and
provide grid-interactive solutions to
optimise time of use of energy.

Legend
Planning and delivering
Paying for energy infrastructure ● Marketing an all-electric precinct ● Checklist of
key issues for an all-electric grid-interactive precincts

GHG
EMISSIONS

Gas

Case Studies
Ginninderry, ACT ● The YARDS, NSW ● Harbour Shores, QLD

`

Electricity

Rating tools and sustainable finance requirements
Green Star ● Climate Bonds ● Sustainable finance frameworks

More information
Myths and barriers ● References ● Appendix: Terminology and making claims

A practical guide for grid-optimised precincts

Other

Upfront
Carbon
Emissions

USED
FOR
Heating, hot water,
cooking, local
electricity generation
and manufacturing
Heating, cooling,
ventilation, lighting,
precinct infrastructure,
EV charging, etc
Emergency (backup)
power, diesel fire
pumps, and refrigerant
leakage.
GHG emissions due to
construction of new
precincts (materials,
products, site activities)

Powered by renewables
Provide all electricity from
100% renewable sources, both
on-site and/or off-site.

Lower upfront carbon
Reduce upfront carbon of buildings,
infrastructure and open spaces
through design choices, construction
processes and material/product
procurement.

Address remaining emissions
Procure nature-based offsets for the
remaining GHG emissions until they
can be eliminated.

A practical guide for grid-optimised precincts

1

Introduction

Climate change, health and wellbeing, natural resource
depletion, consumer preferences, investor demand, community
expectations and rising energy prices – these are vital issues that
are impacting how we develop new residential, commercial,
industrial, logistics, health and educational precincts.
If we are to reduce GHG emissions due to the operation of
buildings and infrastructure in precincts and meet net zero carbon
goals, new precincts must be fossil fuel free, energy efficient and
powered by renewables. The key steps are to eliminate the use of
natural gas (and liquified petroleum gas (LPG)) and to design
precinct infrastructure to be responsive to the way that electricity
will be generated and consumed over the next decade.
Burning fossil fuels to generate heat, hot water and to cook food
has been the go-to solution since the industrial revolution. Natural
gas boilers and cookers are the pinnacle of this technology in
buildings. A decade ago, they offered lower carbon solutions than
using Australia’s grid electricity, which saw generated primarily
using coal. Not anymore.

What do we
mean by
precinct?
Greenfield

Greenfield precincts are typically undeveloped land on the
outskirts of urban areas.
They necessitate the construction of new roads, public
transport and utilities to integrate with adjacent urban
infrastructure.

Brownfield

The revolution in clean, renewable energy, addressing the
challenges of climate change, air quality and energy affordability,
has changed this irrevocably. All-electric precincts, with buildings
using proven electric technologies powered by this clean energy,
are an essential step towards zero carbon and lower energy bills.
The age of gas use in our precincts is coming to an end.

Brownfield precincts are a formerly developed land for
commercial or industrial use, now vacant or underused.
They are a specific type of urban infill.
Existing infrastructure on site may be suitable for reuse /
upgrade, or may require removal and replacement with new.

The revolution in electric vehicles is also gaining momentum in
Australia as the world’s leading manufacturers commit to phasing
out diesel and petrol vehicles. Precincts, not gas stations, will be
where most vehicles are charged – at homes, in car parks or on
streets.

Urban infill
A precinct in established urban areas that repurposes vacant or
previously utilised sites. The site will typically connect to
adjacent existing infrastructure.

Every new precinct can be built to be all-electric today
using technologies that are proven, efficient and
available.
Precincts play a key role as the interface between the electricity
grid and the buildings and systems consuming, generating and
storing electricity on site. This guide discusses how new precincts
can be designed to support:
•

All-electric low energy buildings

•

Electricity grid resilience and demand reduction

•

Electric vehicle charging

•

Lower energy bills for households and businesses.

A practical guide for grid-optimised precincts

When we talk about precinct developments, we typically mean the
following typologies.

Campus

Campuses are precincts typically owned by a single entity like a
university, retirement living or healthcare provider.

2

A practical guide for grid-optimised precincts

3

The right
solution today

The concept of all-electric precincts is not novel. In regions further
south, the presence of natural gas from Bass Strait and colder
winters has historically led to a dependency on gas for heating.
However, in many warmer parts of the country, all-electric solutions
have often been the preferred choice for new developments.

The solution to climate change
Transitioning to all-electric buildings and precincts, especially those
powered by renewable energy, emerges as the most viable strategy
for reducing carbon emissions within the built environment. As the
electricity grid becomes greener, any new development relying on
gas will produce significantly more emissions than a comparable allelectric project, even one that only uses grid-supplied power. The
environmental benefits are further amplified when these precincts
incorporate onsite renewable energy sources.

Lower costs – today and tomorrow
Electrification not only minimises carbon footprints but also offers
superior financial outcomes. By leveraging renewable energy at a
precinct scale, electrification enhances the reliability of energy
supply for both users and grid operators.
For precinct operators, building owners, and tenants, all-electric
models present opportunities to lower energy expenses, shield
themselves from the fluctuations of global energy markets and
geopolitical unrest, and avoid the costs associated with maintaining
an increasingly obsolete gas infrastructure.
By excluding gas networks, these precincts avoid the complexities
and costs associated with gas infrastructure installation, such as
trenching and navigating property easements. This simplification
benefits development managers and contractors alike.

Ready for the future
An all-electric approach streamlines the coordination of energy
generation, storage, and demand management, thus bolstering grid
stability. The integration of onsite renewable energy sources, battery
storage, smart demand management systems, and advanced
electric vehicle (EV) charging stations with Vehicle-to-Grid
capabilities ensures that all-electric precincts are well-equipped for
future demands, delivering lasting value.

assets aligned with clear decarbonisation goals. All-electric
precincts, capable of utilising renewable energy, align with this
trend and are gaining recognition within global sustainable finance
frameworks.
Furthermore, corporate reporting of greenhouse gas (GHG)
emissions is becoming a standard practice, with mandatory
disclosure requirements expected to extend to the built
environment sector by mid-2024. The practice of offsetting gas
emissions to claim carbon neutrality is increasingly viewed as
insufficient.

Government ready
Legislative support for all-electric developments is strengthening,
with previous mandates for gas infrastructure installation being
revoked. Emerging policies are discouraging new gas connections,
signaling a transition from gas as a mandatory utility to an
increasingly restricted option. Amendments to the National
Construction Code now require provisions for batteries and EV
charging facilities in certain building categories.
Government incentives for adopting electric appliances and
installing battery systems are in place, with more expected to
encourage the shift to all-electric buildings. This will further drive
the development of industry capacity and expertise.

Preferred by everyone
Public awareness regarding the health and environmental
implications of domestic gas use is growing, alongside a
preference for EV-ready homes. This shift in consumer sentiment is
evident in the housing market, influencing discussions around new
home and apartment sales within these precincts.
As efforts to decarbonise the economy intensify, there will be a
growing need to retrofit existing assets and phase out fossil fueldependent systems. All-electric precincts are ahead in this
transition, making them more attractive and future-ready
investments.

Industry leaders are increasingly committing to gas-free new
constructions, and major property owners are formulating strategies
to eliminate gas from their existing portfolios. The choice to
incorporate gas infrastructure in new developments carries the risk
of underutilisation, given the shifting market preferences.

Follow the money
Investors and financial institutions are increasingly favouring

A practical guide for grid-optimised precincts

4

A practical guide for grid-optimised precincts

5

From today’s precincts to the precincts of the future
Typical precinct

All-electric precinct

Grid-interactive precinct

A typical precinct has electricity and gas infrastructure connecting
buildings back to the national grids.

All-electric precincts have no gas infrastructure and typically
use electricity for heating, hot water, cooking and other
processes.

Grid-interactive precincts work together with the electricity
grid to modulate when electricity is used throughout the day.
Through a combination of efficiency, controls, generation,
storage and sharing, the precinct’s energy profile can flex to
better align with the supply and demand profile of the
electricity grid.

Key benefits:
• Most parties familiar with the design requirements, costs,
stakeholder processes and approval timeframes

Key benefits:
• Lower GHG emissions as no gas emissions (scope 1)
and electricity grid is rapidly decarbonising (scope 2).

Challenges:
• Cost of installing gas infrastructure will ultimately be paid for by
developers and/or consumers

• Lower energy costs due to better efficiency and only
paying for one energy supply instead of two.

• Reliance on gas exposes consumers to fluctuating prices and
higher energy costs.

• Lower total cost of energy infrastructure as no gas pipes,
valves, meters and trenching to install and maintain.

• Shifting away from gas later may incur substantial retrofitting
expenses which may be inequitable for those that can’t afford to
do so.

• Less utility trenching and easements on site .

Key benefits:
• Uses and stores electricity when prices are lower to
reduce energy bills.
• Reduces demand and consumption when electricity
prices are higher to reduce energy bills.
• Integrates on-site renewables and storage within the
precinct to support grid stability.

• See also page 5 for other benefits.

Challenges:

Challenges:

• As more customers switch from gas, the cost of maintaining the
gas infrastructure in the precinct will be met by a dwindling
number of customers, increasing their energy bills further.

• Uncertainty or conservatism in planning and designing
an all-electric precinct may result in costlier electricity
infrastructure and longer timeframes for approval.

• Gas releases GHG emissions (both when combusted and
through leakage) and reduces indoor air quality when used for
cooking

• Transitioning to electric technologies may require
customer education and support.

• Emerging systems and approaches to grid
responsiveness and controls will require planning,
expertise and management skills and capacity to be
developed in the industry.
• Potentially increased capital costs for smart controls and
systems in buildings.
• Regulatory and market constraints may restrict grid
interaction and energy trading at the time the precinct is
being developed (but this may change over time).

Coal

Gas

Oil

Solar

Wind

Hydro

Biogas &
green H2

Storage

Responding to the energy revolution
The way that electricity is generated, distributed, stored and
consumed in Australia is rapidly changing.
By 2050 the grid is expected to be fully renewable with wind
and solar predicted to produce over 80% of annual electricity.
Most buildings and vehicles will be all-electric increasing the
demand for electricity.

By 2050

Energy storage will also increase significantly with
consumer-owned batteries (including buildings and EVs)
accounting for 65% of storage capacity. Grid scale storage
will support grid stability and long-term storage depth.1

A practical guide for grid-optimised precincts

6

A practical guide for grid-optimised precincts

76

Stakeholder
engagement

Delivering precinct energy infrastructure involves many stakeholders. When planning for an an-electric precinct it is important to understand the roles of each, and to have early
discussions to identify opportunities, address potential challenges and facilitate coordination and collaboration.

Stakeholder

Role

Key issues to discuss

Opportunities for the stakeholder

Distributed
Network
Service
Provider
(DNSP)

Manages the electrical distribution
from high-voltage interfaces to
buildings, excluding embedded
networks.

• Capacity for importing and exporting electricity.
• Network upgrade costs and contributions.
• Demand reduction with batteries in buildings, precincts and
vehicle to home / grid (v2h/g) systems.
• Potential for embedded networks or microgrids.
• Easement considerations.

• Innovative low-carbon, resilient, and fully electric solutions.
• Optimise infrastructure through partnerships, reducing network limitations
and costs.
• Address early, the future increased demands from electric vehicles and
solar power.

Electricity
Retailer

Sells electricity from the electricity
market to consumers.

• Virtual Power Plant (VPP) energy sharing prospects.
• Implementation and management of microgrids.
• Overseeing precinct-level batteries and photovoltaic (PV)
systems.

• Development of innovative products centered on renewable energy
generation, load management, and energy sharing within precincts and
buildings.

Planning
Authority

Approves the Precinct Structure
Plan, staged development
applications, and individual building
applications.

• Zoning adjustments to accommodate electrical infrastructure,
including substations and renewable energy installations.
• Incentives or requirements for renewable energy generation and
storage within the precinct.

• Alignment with state and council zero carbon goals and targets.
• Boost precinct appeal with modern electrification solutions.
• Establish benchmarks for electrified urban development.

Local
Government

Manages streets, public spaces,
street lighting, and public EV
charging infrastructure.

• Agree embedded network easements.
• Responsibility for public EV chargers.
• Responsibility for precinct PV and batteries.

• Alignment with council zero carbon goals and targets.
• Reduce energy bills for council owned assets in the precinct.
• Efficient street lighting solutions.
• Enhancements to cycling, walking paths and public transit access.

Building
Developers
and Owners

Develop, own and manage allelectric, grid-interactive buildings.

• Develop buildings to be all-electric and grid-interactive.
• Requirements for rooftop solar, batteries, V2H/G EV charging
and energy sharing.
• Participation in embedded networks / microgrids, or virtual
power plans or other energy sharing models.

• Integration into a low-carbon, electric-ready precinct.
• Enhanced grid resilience, reducing outage risks.
• Reduce peak electricity demand and charges.
• Expanded EV charging for occupants.
• New revenue from energy trading schemes.

Investors &
Funders

Provide capital funding for precinct
and building development.

• Developing green bonds and sustainable finance options.
• Accessing discounted rates and government incentives for
energy storage and demand flexibility.
• Investment opportunities in future-proofed precincts.

• Investments meet ESG and sustainability standards.
• Avoid risks associated with obsolete gas infrastructure.
• Eliminate reputational risks linked to funding new projects using fossil
fuels.

Residents
and
community
groups

Live in or represent those that will
live in the precinct.

• Community input in precinct planning.
• Electrification’s benefits on amenities and property values.
• Access and affordability of electric services.

• Reduce energy bills.
• Better living environments and improved air quality
• Enhanced property values with sustainable infrastructure.
• Community involvement in local energy projects.

A practical guide for grid-optimised precincts

8

A practical guide for grid-optimised precincts

9

Design considerations in all-electric grid-interactive precincts
An all-electric grid-interactive precinct acts as the interface between the electricity grid and the
buildings in the precinct. Designing an all-electric precinct requires consideration of both the
physical infrastructure (what is installed and who owns it) and the commercial arrangements (how
the electricity is traded). The physical infrastructure is critical as this is difficult and expensive to
modify later, whereas the commercial arrangements (buying, selling and storing electricity) can
vary over time, provided the right easements and metering is in place to provide flexibility for this.
The diagram highlights the key components to consider when planning and delivering an allelectric precinct. These are described in more detail in the following pages of the guide.

A

Planning an all-electric grid-interactive precinct

B

Precinct energy infrastructure

C

Grid-interactive precincts

D

Peak energy management

E

On-site renewable opportunities

F

Electric vehicle infrastructure

G

Battery storage

H

Other forms of storage

I

Planning for all-electric buildings

A practical guide for grid-optimised precincts

10

A practical guide for grid-optimised precincts

11

A

Planning an all-electric grid-interactive precinct

1

Establish a vision
•
•

3

Consider how an all-electric approach contributes to the project vision for
sustainability, liveability, resilience and affordability.

Evaluate the mix of stakeholders who may occupy or use the precinct and
how they will benefit from an all-electric precinct.

•

Some stakeholders may have specific needs that could influence the
electrification strategy, including their own commitments to reducing their
carbon impact, adopting renewable energy, and incorporating electric
vehicles (EVs). These stakeholders could potentially become partners in
the strategy's delivery.
The precinct should be positioned to adapt to the rapid uptake of EVs and
anticipate future changes in electricity tariffs, which are expected to evolve
to reflect a more dynamic renewable electricity system.

4

Precinct master planning and Precinct Energy Plan
•

•

Precinct Structure Plan
•

Confirm the objective to be an all-electric grid responsive precinct.

•

Start discussions with the Distributed Network Service Providers (DNSP) to:

Understand how the benefits of a low carbon, all electric precinct will
contribute to your organisation’s commitment to sustainability, and the
ESG expectations of your investors.

•

•

2

Workshop with DNSP, planning authority, local government, relevant agencies and
potential customers to explore opportunities for the site. Identify other stakeholders
that may be relevant and how they may work together.
Co-create a Precinct Energy Plan that sets the broad requirements for an all-electric
precinct, taking into consideration:

•

Existing constraints in the network, such as connections to transmission
infrastructure, or substation limitations.

•

Initial modelling of likely load profiles for the site, based on expected
population, land uses, growth in EVs, rooftop solar PV and batteries.

•

Identify possible network models (e.g., microgrids, embedded networks) and
associated governance ownership models, delivery partners and finance
arrangements for precinct energy systems.

•

Set aside land through easements for location of precinct scale distributed
energy resources such as batteries, solar PV shading and EV charging.

A practical guide for grid-optimised precincts

12

•

Understand local capacity (both supply and export from solar).

•

Review their five-year investment plans for upgraded or new distribution
networks which may affect the precinct.

•

Determine potential for load management (including grid-interactive buildings,
smart controls, batteries, embedded networks, etc).

•

Understand potential contribution charges, how these are calculated, and how
they can be reduced through a collaborative approach to managing loads.

•

Identify key infrastructure requirements like easements and spatial provisions in
buildings and precinct for energy generation, storage and EV charging.

•

Discuss with potential building developers and owners the requirements for allelectric buildings, and potential future proofing for solar PV, batteries, EV charging
and grid interactive controls.

Development approvals and applying for the precinct’s
network connection
•

Ensure the masterplan has made adequate spatial provision for the infrastructure
identified in the Precinct Energy Plan.

•

If embedded networks are proposed, identify the necessary easements and discuss
these with the local council and DNSP.

•

Submit to the DNSP for approval to connect the precinct to the electricity grid in
accordance with the Precinct Energy Plan. This may be needed before planning
approvals are given by the planning authority.

•

Be aware that the processes for seeking approval will differ from one DNSP to
another and may have additional or alternative steps based on your Precinct Energy
Plan.

A practical guide for grid-optimised precincts

13

B Precinct
energy
infrastructure

Precincts provide an opportunity to create different methods
of buying and selling electricity. There are currently four main
types, but others may evolve over time.

Traditional
network

Traditional
network

A traditional electricity network in a precinct typically involves a gridbased generation model, where power is produced off-site and
distributed through a network of transmission and distribution lines
to end users. For many decades, this power generation has been
typically via coal fired power stations, but these are closing and
replaced with renewable energy and grid scale batteries.
A Distribution Network Service Provider (DNSP), owns and operates
the poles and wires connected to the building or infrastructure
within a specific geographic area, and are responsible for the
provision of electricity through this system, with their costs built into
the retailer’s customer tariffs. Customers have a choice of retailer,
but not of DNSP.

Embedded
network

The traditional model prioritises reliability and widespread
accessibility, with regulatory frameworks in place to manage
operations and tariffs.

Key features and benefits:
Microgrid

•

Grid generation: Power is produced off-site by large scale
generators, allowing for economies of scale in electricity
generation. While this can be more efficient, the electricity
may be generated long distances from the precinct, with
associated distribution losses and costs.

•

Regulated reliability: DNSPs are subject to regulatory
standards, to maintain consistent and reliable electricity
supply to all connected customers.

•

Widespread accessibility: The grid infrastructure supports
broad coverage, providing electricity to a wide range of
customers, from densely populated urban areas to remote
rural locations.

•

Simplicity and familiarity: The traditional structure of
generation, transmission, and distribution is well-established,
offering a familiar framework for both providers and
consumers.

•

Emergency response: DNSPs have established protocols for
rapid response to outages and emergencies, ensuring swift
restoration of services.

Virtual Power
Plant (VPP)

Legend

Grid electricity
network

Large scale
renewable Power
Purchase
Agreements

Precinct
substation

Owned by the
Distributed
Network Service
Provider (DNSP)

Owned by Embedded
Network Operator
(ENO)

Renewable energy
generated on site

A practical guide for grid-optimised precincts

Virtual demand
aggregator
Provided by the
virtual demand
aggregator

14

A practical guide for grid-optimised precincts

15

Embedded
networks

B

Embedded
network
considerations

D

C

A

Embedded networks are privately owned energy systems within
precincts, managed by an Embedded Network Operator (ENO) (A).
These networks are common in shopping centres, retirement
villages, university campuses, airports, industrial estates and holiday
parks. In residential developments, especially those owned and
operated by the developer for extended periods, embedded networks
also exist, but are subject to additional rules to address consumer
contestability (choice of energy retailer) and pricing. The ENO can be
the precinct owner, or a separate contracted entity (which can also
include the DNSP company).
From the perspective of a Distribution Network Service Provider
(DNSP) (B), an embedded network operates "behind the meter“. This
means that the DNSP is not responsible for the management or
safety of the embedded network within the precinct beyond the gate
meter. DNSP’s impose requirements for connecting an embedded
network to the DNSP’s network.

These are issues to consider around precinct embedded networks:

Scale
•

Registration and demand: ENOs must be registered as
electricity providers. For smaller precincts, compliance costs
may not be justified, so consider an external partnership.

•

Customer mix and demand: assess the balance and energy
needs of residential and commercial occupants.

•

Onsite energy generation and storage: evaluate the capacity,
distribution and storage potential of solar PV electricity
produced within the precinct.

Infrastructure
•

Access and easements: for the network need to be planned
carefully, to avoid clashes with other easements and to enable
access for upgrades/maintenance without impacting others.

•

Connectivity requirements: check if local regulations require
connection to a DNSP’s network when selling a property lot.

Negotiating with DNSPs
•

DNSP relationship: understand the DNSP's stance on
embedded networks and its potential impact on their revenue.

•

Load management benefits: consider if an embedded
network's load management can reduce the need for DNSP
network enhancements, potentially lowering associated fees.

•

Regulatory interpretation: embedded network rules, especially
for high-voltage systems, may vary by DNSP (and individuals
within the DNSP’s own interpretation). Start discussions early.

•

Response times: gauge the DNSP’s commitment to timely
responses for connection applications, as delays could affect
the development timeline.

Key features and benefits:
•

Cost of energy: Lowers precinct energy costs by purchasing
from the wholesale electricity markets in bulk. Most precinct
customers should be able to realise lower energy bills
compared to buying individually from retailers (but depends on
ENO’s pricing policies and profit margins).

Customers
•

Utilising precinct renewables: Facilitates local distribution and
storage of precinct-generated energy, avoiding DNSP
transmission fees (C).

Customer choice and pricing: residential customers can
typically choose their own electricity retailer under
contestability rules. Can the ENO offer competitive rates to
maximise the number of customers signed up in the precinct
to deliver further economies of scale?

•

Network service costs: customers must cover the ENO's
network services fees, similar to a DNSP's charges.

•

Power Purchase Agreements: Enables long-term renewable
power purchase agreements to be signed, reducing costs (D).

•

•

Revenue opportunities: Creates potential income streams for
precinct owners - selling electricity to precinct customers,
selling stored/surplus electricity back to the grid, and providing
frequency control and grid reliability services.

Perceived risk: given that ENOs are private entities, with
potentially less scale and rules than DNSPs, potential
customers may be wary of future risks including reliability of
supply and unregulated cost increases.

•

Load management: Enables active energy sharing within the
precinct to manage peak loads and smooth import/export
profiles with the grid.

•

A practical guide for grid-optimised precincts

16

A practical guide for grid-optimised precincts

17

Microgrids

Virtual Power
Plants (VPP)
B
A
A
B
C

Microgrids, typically under the ownership and management of a
Distribution Network Service Provider (DNSP) (A), incorporate
control systems for precinct-scale energy management. This
setup enables localised energy generation and utilisation,
alongside energy trading and demand management.

A Virtual Power Plant (VPP) integrates various Distributed Energy
Resources (DERs) (A) like rooftop solar panels, batteries, electric
vehicles (EVs), smart appliances, and interactive building systems.
These resources are collectively managed through software (B),
allowing them to function as a unified power entity and engage in
energy markets.

Positioned "in front of the meter” (B), microgrids fall within the
DNSP's overarching grid management responsibilities, aligning
their operation with the broader network's standards.

Key features and benefits:
•

Financial structure: Microgrids benefit the DNSP financially,
unlike embedded networks.

•

Independent operation: Capable of 'islanding' to maintain
power during external grid issues, enhancing safety and
reliability. They may be used in remote areas as selfsufficient systems.

Key features and benefits:

•

Community resilience: Can provide dependable energy
during disruptions, such as extreme weather, ensuring
community stability, when paired with on-site power.

•

Economical and reliable: Offers a cost-effective and reliable
energy solution for remote areas compared to traditional
network extensions.

•

Maintenance and safety: The DNSP is responsible for
microgrid maintenance, upholding the same standards as
the broader grid, contrasting with the self-managed
approach of embedded networks.

A practical guide for grid-optimised precincts

VPPs are typically managed by DER Aggregators, which can be
energy retailers or independent entities, including communityowned not-for-profits. The unique aspect of VPPs is that their
participants need not be confined to a single location. The power
generated from these entities can then be sold to third parties (C).
This concept, especially energy sharing between buildings, is still
emerging in Australia, with pilot projects underway to refine its
implementation and address systemic needs.

18

•

Aggregated electricity use: VPPs enable the aggregation of
electricity from various sources, allowing the DER Aggregator
or retailer to meet demand peaks without purchasing
additional energy from the market.

•

Financial incentives: Households and businesses
participating in VPPs receive financial rewards, encouraging
wider adoption.

•

Community benefits: Non-profit community VPPs can offer
more affordable energy solutions with reduced emissions.
These models depend on having enough participants, having
a baseline community energy load met by renewable sources
(like solar or wind projects) and being optimised with a
communal battery system.

A practical guide for grid-optimised precincts

19

Why grid-interactive precincts matter
The way that electricity is generated and used is changing rapidly:
•

There is a rise in overall demand as services powered by
natural gas in buildings, and cars fueled with petrol, diesel and
LPG, all make the switch to electricity.

•

There is a potential mismatch between when electricity is used
and when electricity is generated by renewables, particularly
from rooftop PV systems and solar farms.

Without planning and management, these changes could lead to
increasing national electrical infrastructure and generation capacity
by more than needed, which could increase the cost of energy.
Grid-interactive precincts can assist in smoothing the transition to a
fully renewable national electricity grid by reducing electricity
consumption, minimising peak demand, shifting the time of day that
electricity is imported from the grid, and utilising electricity when it is
in abundance and at its cheapest.

The importance of time-of-use in electricity
As renewable energy increasingly powers the electricity grid, the time
of use of electricity (hours of kilowatts) will become as important as
overall quantity of consumption (kilowatt hours).

A

DEMAND

C Gridinteractive
precincts

6am

This change to the shape of the electricity demand profile was
nicknamed the 'duck curve’, by the California Independent Service
Operator.3 The duck curve creates challenges for grid operators,
particularly during the energy transition. To supply energy during the
times where renewables are still not available, the grid continues to
operate with fossil fuels.
Coal-fired power stations currently provide the bulk of electricity
generation in Australia but cannot ramp up and down quickly to
reflect the supply and demand curve. The solution going forward is a
more dynamic and responsive grid, by increasing energy storage and
adding more renewable power diversity. AEMO, Australia’s energy
market operator already has plans to address this.4
Retailers are also responding. Traditionally, consumer electricity
pricing was uniform, but the renewable energy revolution is
prompting changes to tariff structures to better reflect the wholesale
electricity prices paid to generators (lower during the day, highest in
early evening). This will then incentivise customers to shift their
demand to minimise consumption when prices and highest – to
flatten the curve.

C

B

Total demand profile
with solar

when electricity prices are at their highest. It’s a simple case of the
market forces of supply and demand in action.2

12pm

Would you like to know more?

6pm
Total demand profile
without solar

Traditionally the energy network was built on having a level of
generation to meet a predictable demand profile (A). However, with
rapidly increasing amounts of on-site and off-site renewables, this
has changed. As solar electricity generation kicks in the demand for
grid electricity in buildings and homes rooftop solar falls (B). Any
excess solar is exported to the grid. This surplus of electricity,
together with reduced demand, drives down wholesale electricity
prices during the day (10am to 4pm), often to less than $0 per MWh.
The grid’s carbon footprint of electricity is also much lower as its
nearly all from renewables. In the evening, solar production drops off
at the same time as demand on the grid reaches its peak (C). This is

A practical guide for grid-optimised precincts

20

The topic of managing time-of-use, and the
challenges that this brings to Australia, our
infrastructure, and our built environment is complex
and multifaceted. The summary in this section has
been streamlined for readability and skips over
important detail and context. If you would like to know
more, there are two reports worth reading:
•

‘From net zero to zero, a discussion paper on grid
interactive buildings’, GBCA & Buildings Alive,
2023

•

‘Clean Energy, Clean Demand’, Energy Efficiency
Council, 2023.

A practical guide for grid-optimised precincts

21

D

Peak energy
management

The transition to electrified precincts could result in larger electricity
infrastructure compared to a typical precinct, mostly due to:
•

The shift from gas to electricity for space heating, domestic
hot water, and cooking.

•

The installation of EV charging stations for private, public, and
industrial use.

•

The electrification of various processes, ranging from steam
generation to light manufacturing activities.

Precinct infrastructure is the interface between buildings and the
electricity grid, and therefore will play an important role in integrated
energy solutions. Changing electricity tariff structures will be key to
incentivising solutions, both design and operations, to reduce peak
demand and manage when electricity is used.
Effective energy management within precincts can be achieved
through a range of measures. These can be linked to signals from
the electricity grid to further optimise when to use electricity and
when to minimise.
•

Smart controls to manage demand, including modulating
systems up and down across multiple buildings to avoid
everything being on at the same time.

•

Battery storage – charge up when electricity is cheap and
discharge when its expensive or to smooth out peak loads.
Batteries can include EV charging.

•

Thermal energy storage – generate hot or chilled water when
electricity is cheap, store in tanks, and then use this when
electricity prices increase.

This diagram showcases a
residential precinct with typical
energy consumption (A), leading to
pronounced peaks in the electrical
grid's load profile (B). This
homogeneity in usage—often due to
similar daily schedules or appliance
use—exacerbates demand spikes,
challenging grid stability and
requiring expensive infrastructure
upgrades.

B
A

6am

12pm

6pm

Diversity in precinct use can be used to smooth out peak demand at
the precinct substation connection to the grid. A mix of building
types — commercial peaking mid-afternoon and residential in the
morning and evening — and energy sharing between them can help
smooth overall precinct energy demand.
Electrical infrastructure design should be based on diversified actual
demand rather than the sum of individual peak demands, using
empirical data to develop tailored diversity factors. This approach
aligns with the DNSP's requirements and circumvents unnecessary
upgrades.
The overarching aim for an all-electric precinct is a balanced
demand profile at both the precinct sub-station and within buildings.

D
A
C

6am

A practical guide for grid-optimised precincts

22

12pm

This diagram illustrates a diverse
precinct with mixed-use buildings
that achieve a balanced energy load
profile (A and C), as shown by the
overlaid sine waves. Varied
occupancy and energy usage
patterns, along with technologies like
solar and batteries, lessen peak
demands on the grid (D), showcasing
the benefits of strategic urban
planning for grid efficiency and
sustainability.

6pm

A practical guide for grid-optimised precincts

23

E On-site
renewable
generation

The benefits of
on-site generation

Solar photovoltaic (PV) is currently the cheapest form of electricity
generation in Australia. Precincts should be designed and built to
take advantage of on-site generation opportunities as doing so can
have multiple benefits, from reducing costs, to helping improve the
resilience of the grid and the community.

Rooftop solar on homes
30%-100% of the home’s electricity can
be provided by renewables

Rooftop solar on medium to
high rise apartments
5% to 20% building’s electricity can be

On-site solar installations yields several benefits to all electric
precincts:
•

Reduced energy costs: On-site solar significantly lowers
energy expenses by harnessing free solar power. After
recouping the initial solar panel investment, electricity costs
decrease, offering long-term savings for all residents and
building managers.

•

Increased energy independence: Generating their own power,
precincts reduce reliance on external grids, enhancing
resilience to outages and mitigating the effects of price
volatility, especially where grid infrastructure is lacking.

•

Environmental sustainability: Solar power, a clean and
renewable energy source, cuts greenhouse gas emissions and
pollution, lowering precincts' carbon footprints and supporting
global climate action.

•

Enhanced property values: Solar-equipped properties often
gain in value due to reduced running costs and attractiveness
to eco-conscious buyers, making solar a wise investment with
potential for greater resale values and rents.

•

Support for local grids: Surplus solar energy can be fed back
into the local grid, aiding community energy needs and
possibly yielding financial returns through feed-in tariffs or net
metering.

provided by renewables

Solar equity in
precincts

In some precincts it may not be possible for all residents or users
to access the benefit of cheap electricity from rooftop solar
because they live in an apartment or have a shaded roof. In
existing buildings, challenges include not being able to afford the
cost of installing solar, or renting a property where the landlord
would pay for the solar but not realise the energy cost savings.
The potential to install community solar systems so that all
residents have the ability to access the benefits can be
investigated for new precincts. There are a range of mechanisms
available to deliver this.

Rooftop solar on industrial
building

Solar over precinct
infrastructure

20% to more than 100% can be

100% of all power can be provided

provided by renewables

to the precinct or other buildings

A practical guide for grid-optimised precincts

However, even if on-site solutions are limited, all-electric precincts
still make sense – after all, the grid is already rapidly
decarbonising.

24

A practical guide for grid-optimised precincts

25

Rooftop solar on
houses

A rooftop solar system can generate more than 100% of the annual
electricity consumption of a household including electric vehicle
charging. However, the time of generation (9am to 4pm) doesn’t
align with the typical peak times of consumption (7am to 9am and
4pm to 9pm).
The electricity generation from rooftop solar is higher in the summer
than the winter, while the consumption may be higher in the winter
in some climates due to space heating by heat pumps.

Rooftop solar on
non-residential
buildings

Part J9 of Volume 1 of the National Construction Code 2022
mandates future proofing non-residential buildings for solar PV to at
least 20% of the roof area (with some exceptions).
In some buildings there may be competition for roof space – for
plant (equipment), plants (green roofs), people (roof terraces) and
solar. Through good design these can all work together:

Rooftop solar systems can be sized to generate the typical daily
consumption of a peak day (winter or summer). However, without
significant load shifting this would result in more electricity being
exported to the grid.
The surplus electricity generated during the day is typically exported
to the precinct network. If this surplus can’t be used elsewhere in
the precinct, then it will need to be exported to the electricity grid.
Where there are precinct or grid capacity constraints it may not be
possible to export the surplus electricity, leading to the PV being
curtailed.

A house can be designed to maximise use of solar electricity
through a combination of:

PV shading to terraces can make them more useable in
summer months.

•

Putting plants below solar panels not only provides habitat,
but the vegetation keeps the solar panels cooler, increasing
their efficiency.

As a building gets taller the opportunity for solar to make a
significant contribution to the building’s energy demand reduces.

The chart below shows the percentage of annual electricity able to
be generated by rooftop solar covering 80% of the roof of a
commercial office building in Sydney with a 5 Star NABERS Energy
Whole Building rating (tenant and landlord).

•

Smart controls to manage time of use to smooth out the
electricity consumption profile (a simple example is to run
washing machines and dishwashers during the day not at
night).

•

Thermal storage of domestic hot water (DHW) – generate hot
water during the day for use later.

•

Provide space and electrical capacity for a battery and a
V2H/G EV charger (to install on Day 1 or in the future when
required) to store surplus electricity generated

160%

The electricity consumption profile for multi-unit developments can
be like houses. The area of roof available per unit depends on
number of storeys. Consequently, the proportion of electricity able
to be generated on site using rooftop solar reduces as buildings get
taller. This means there will be more reliance on both precinct and
grid renewable energy systems to power the building.
Apartment buildings can still take advantage of batteries, thermal
energy storage and energy management systems to minimise
import of electricity during peak cost periods. How this is delivered
will depend on the electricity supply arrangements, including
whether it is controlled centrally (including embedded networks) or
at each individual unit.

A practical guide for grid-optimised precincts

PV shading to equipment prolongs the life of equipment.

•

On industrial and logistics buildings there are large areas of roof
available for PV panels and these roofs should be designed to
maximise PV coverage, with the NCC now requiring them to be
structurally capable to take the load.

Likely percentage generated

Rooftop solar on
apartments

•

140%
120%
100%
80%
60%
40%
20%

0%

1
2 should
3
4 designed
5
6to easily
7 share
8
9
10
This is why precincts
be
energy
–
so buildings with surplus generation
sell it to those without.
No. ofcan
storeys

26

A practical guide for grid-optimised precincts

27

Rooftop solar on
precinct
infrastructure

There are many other opportunities to install solar PV systems in
precincts to generate electricity.
One solution is to install PV shading to car parking spaces, both in
public spaces and within lots developed privately. A car parking
space covered with PV panels will generate more electricity per year
than the average electric vehicle parked in the space will consume
in a year.
The issue of time of generation versus time of charging would still
need to be addressed, and this is where battery storage can play a
role. The EV also has a large battery and itself becomes part of the
solution.
Solar shading of car parking bays also reduces the heat island
effect associated with large expanses of hard standing. Precinct
developers could make this a conditional requirement for any
development within the precinct, including parking provided within
private lots.

Other renewables

There are limited options for other types of on-site renewable energy
generation in most precincts. The following could be considered but
are unlikely to be viable unless the location and type of precinct are
suitable.

Wind turbines
These are most economical at grid scale and will play a very
significant role in the decarbonisation of the grid in the coming
years. The feasibility at a precinct scale is limited but may be
relevant to remote and windy locations. Small scale wind turbines
are not likely to be viable in a precinct development. Community
owned wind turbines offsetting local energy use are possible, but
developer/precinct operator led power purchase agreements are
more likely.

Energy from waste
Most precincts would prefer not to have energy-to-waste power
stations close to residential and commercial buildings due to odour,
noise and air pollution issues. The focus on waste in precincts
should be to reduce, reuse and recycle.

A practical guide for grid-optimised precincts

28

A practical guide for grid-optimised precincts

29

F Electric
Vehicles

EVs in homes,
apartments and
civic spaces

Precincts must prioritise walkability, cycling safety, and public
transport to reduce car dependence — a key solution to
decarbonising our economy.

Under the National Construction Code, new residential buildings with
car parking must include EV charging infrastructure for classes 2-9
buildings. For single dwellings, installing a dedicated charging circuit
in the garage is straightforward, allowing for both long-duration and
rapid charging. The potential for vehicle batteries to serve as
building energy storage is emerging. With electric car ranges
exceeding 400 km in 20238 and expected to increase, the necessity
for workplace or retail charging is reduced, given most trips are
under 40 km. However, in civic spaces, retail centres, and
workplaces, some designated top-up spaces are beneficial,
alongside leveraging car batteries for peak load management.

However, car use will persist in new and existing developments, with
a significant shift towards electric vehicles (EVs) anticipated. Major
automakers are transitioning away from petrol and diesel.
Government policy will also drive this, with Australian states like
Victoria, NSW, and Queensland targeting 50% EV sales by 2030.
AEMO projects a 60% EV presence on Australian roads by 2040.
This shift means that fueling the vehicle will occur in buildings,
typically at home, rather than gas stations. Given the lifespan of
precinct infrastructure and buildings compared to car ownership
cycles, it's crucial to design electrical systems for the future EV
landscape of 2040 and beyond, rather than the immediate needs of
2025.

Street charging will be essential for electric car owners without
residential parking and for transient visitors needing a top up. The
UK's emergence of shared EV charging platforms, akin to Airbnb for
EV chargers (e.g., co-charger.com), highlights this trend.

Public place,
street charging
and shared EV
charging

While immediate installation of EV chargers may not be necessary,
having the infrastructure for future EV adoption will avoid costly
upgrades. EV charging solutions will vary; the focus should be on
future-proofing electrical capacities for the evolving EV landscape,
ensuring buildings and public spaces can accommodate future
charging needs.

Logistics centres will require rapid charging for electric trucks,
necessitating significant power management to accommodate the
high electrical demand.

Reducing energy costs for cars and
homes

1

In 2022, the annual fuel cost for petrol cars averaged
$2,400, in stark contrast to $400 for EVs.5 Petrol prices
fluctuate due to retailers' pricing strategies and global
oil market changes, both beyond car owners' control.
Many people use apps to locate the cheapest petrol,
which may not be the most convenient, to save a few
cents per litre (< 5%).6 EV owners, however, can use
apps to charge during low electricity price periods,
without moving the car from their home, achieving
savings above 300% compared to peak rates.7

1

3

2

3

Vehicle-to-Home (V2H) technology allows some EVs to
supply energy to buildings during peak times or
outages. Similarly, Vehicle-to-Grid (V2G) enables EV
batteries to feed electricity back to the grid. During high
electricity price periods, EV owners can power their
homes or sell excess energy back to the grid, thereby
reducing their overall energy bills.

A practical guide for grid-optimised precincts

2

5

30

4

Power is used to charge EVs.
These also contribute to grid.
A charged EV heads home.

4

The EV provides power to the
home’s switchboard.

5

Power from the roof solar goes
to switchboard.

6

Power from EV and solar is
used for the home to lower
total and peak grid demand.

7

Power from solar used to
charge EV, which can
contribute to the total grid
resilience in step B.

7
6

Power from precinct solar or
off-site solar goes to the
precinct’s grid.

A practical guide for grid-optimised precincts

31

G Battery
Storage

National Energy Storage Strategy
In 2022, the Australian Energy Market Operator (AEMO) published a
draft Integrated System Plan for the transition to a net zero carbon
electricity grid.9 The expected pathway, the ‘step change’ scenario,
forecasts that storage capacity will increase by a factor of 30, from 2
GW in 2022 to 57 GW by 2050, with a total storage depth of 642 GWh.

Building
batteries

They are currently not cost effective in most due to upfront
costs. However, with the introduction of time of use tariffs more
aligned to the wholesale electricity cost profile the business case for
batteries will rapidly change. Combined with the expected reduction in
the cost of batteries, we are on the cusp of batteries
becoming financially advantageous in buildings. This is essential to
deliver the distributed storage required in the AEMO Integrated
System Plan.

This storage comprises a combination of types, each having a
different role in an integrated renewable electricity system:
•

Deep storage (> 12 hours) – to cover periods of lower-thanexpected variable renewable energy generation and seasonal
smoothing of energy over weeks or months.

There are several benefits to batteries in buildings:

•

Shallow storage (< 4 hours) – to provide capacity (GW), fast
ramping and frequency control for grid stability purposes.

•

Medium storage (4 to 12 hours) – intra-day energy shifting
capabilities to manage the duck curve, the daily shape of energy
consumption and the diurnal solar generation pattern.

•

expensive to generate (4pm to 8pm), and to charge up when
electricity is cheap and zero emissions.

Consumer Owned Energy Resource (CER) Storage – behind-themeter household, business or industrial batteries, including EVs
that may be able to send electricity back into the grid.

​The draft Integrated System Plan projects CER Storage to account for
37 GW (65%) of the total storage capacity by 2050- a massive rise
from 0.2 GW today. Batteries in precincts, vehicles and buildings will
be a significant proportion of this storage and are integral to the
future of Australia’s integrated energy system.

•

Reduce energy bills: store surplus rooftop solar
generated electricity, or import low-cost electricity from the grid,
then use this electricity to reduce peak demand charges
and/or consumption during peak electricity tariff periods.

•

Inflation proofing: a battery procured using a loan has a
fixed monthly cost for 10 years (the loan repayments), while the
cost of grid electricity will continue to rise with inflation and
other factors.

•

Resilience: if the battery can operate in
island mode, then resilience is provided during power outages –
and a financial value can be allocated to this depending on how
this affects the occupants of the building.

•

Revenue: batteries can participate in Virtual Power Plant
(VPP) contracts to generate revenue for the battery owner.

The design of new precincts, and the design requirements for
buildings within these precincts, should be future proofed for the
installation of batteries so that these can be installed easily in the
future.

Batteries on
wheels

EVs with vehicle to grid (V2G) capability can be used as batteries on
wheels, acting as energy storage in a similar way to fixed building
batteries. Most vehicles spend long periods of time parked at a
building, and if connected to a bi-directional charger they can be
charged and discharged in a similar way to building batteries.
The vehicle owner will always have the choice about how much of the
EV’s battery capacity is allowed to be charged and discharged, always
leaving enough in reserve for unexpected journeys or a planned long
drive the next day.

Precinct-level
battery 12

Grid-level
battery10

Batteries in buildings are ‘behind the meter’ and primarily allow
buildings to minimise importing electricity from the grid when it is

Building-level
battery 11
A practical guide for grid-optimised precincts

32

A practical guide for grid-optimised precincts

33

Precinct
Batteries

Precinct battery systems can form an integral component of gridinteractive precincts. These systems serve as large-scale energy
storage solutions tailored to the collective needs of a precinct.
Precinct batteries are designed to be responsive to the grid's
demands, capable of storing excess energy during periods of low
demand—often generated from renewable sources like solar and
wind—and discharging it during peak periods.
Precinct batteries may also be installed by DNSPs to minimise total
peak demand to avoid the cost of upgrading the electrical
infrastructure (the “poles and wires” and substations) connecting the
precinct back to the electricity grid.
For example, a precinct battery could be charged during the day with
surplus power from rooftop solar installations or even off-site
renewable energy. During the evening, when the demand spikes and
electricity prices are higher, the stored energy can be released,
reducing the need for expensive and carbon-intensive peak
generation.

Community
batteries

Community batteries represent a scalable and communal approach
to energy storage. Rather than each home or business installing
individual battery systems, a community battery is a shared resource
that multiple consumers can access. It's akin to a neighborhood-scale
battery that offers a buffer for excess solar generation and a source
of power during peak times or outages, without the individual
investment and maintenance concerns.
In Australian grid-interactive precincts, such systems aren't just
theoretical—they're operational. For instance, communities in suburbs
of Perth and Sydney have begun trialing community batteries, which
allow solar panel owners to store excess energy for later use,
providing benefits similar to those of home batteries but at a reduced
cost and increased scale. This not only fosters a sense of community
but also aligns with the broader national goals of reducing carbon
emissions and promoting energy independence

A practical guide for grid-optimised precincts

34

A practical guide for grid-optimised precincts

35

H Thermal
Storage

Energy storage in an all-electric precinct is not limited to storing
electricity in batteries. Electricity can be used to generate
domestic hot water (DHW), heating hot water (HHW) and/or
chilled water (CHW) for use in buildings. This thermal energy can
be stored allowing the time of generation (consumption of
electricity) to be separated, in part or fully, from the time of use of
the water.
This then allows these systems to form part of the peak electricity
demand reduction strategy – and the main cost is larger insulated
storage tanks and the space to put them.

Building storage

Domestic hot water tanks
Storage of Domestic Hot Water is already a very common form of
energy storage. To enable it to form an effective part of a demand
reduction strategy simply requires a larger tank. If it were sized to
meet the evening and morning DHW demand in full, then all the
hot water could be generated between 10am and 4pm and used
when solar electricity is no longer available.
The benefits are:

District systems

At a precinct level, buildings can be connected together in district
heating or cooling systems with centralised and/or distributed
energy generation and storage. While not common in Australia,
the potential to install in new precincts, including combining with
thermal storage, should be considered during the early stages of
planning the energy infrastructure strategy for the precinct. The
viability will be dependent on the precinct scale, type of buildings
(heating/cooling demand profiles) and ownership structures.

District cooling
Central chilled water systems have been used on a number of
university campuses and commercial precincts in Australia.
The very first Green Star rated building in 2003, 8 Brindabella
Circuit at the Brindabella Business Park in Canberra, is connected
to a central chilled water system that served other buildings in the
precinct. This was driven by cost savings as plant rooms for
chillers and cooling towers were not required in each building.
Another example is Barangaroo South in Sydney, which has a
62 MW central chiller plant serving office, residential and retail
buildings in the precinct. The plant utilises sea water cooling,
reducing energy consumption and also water consumption due to
eliminating cooling towers.

•

It utilises cheaper, lower carbon electricity, particularly if the
building has rooftop solar to generate its own electricity.

•

It reduces electricity demand on the grid during peak
morning and evening peaks.

District Heating

If using a heat pump, efficiency improves with higher
outside air temperatures. As its warmer during the day when
the hot water is generated less energy is needed to heat the
water compared to mornings and evenings.

District heating systems are widely used in Europe, China, Russia
and North America to provide space heating and DHW to multiple
buildings in precincts. These systems account for around of 9% of
global heating demand in buildings and industry.13

•

Chilled water storage
Chilled water storage has been used successfully on a number of
university campuses in Australia which have central plant
providing chilled water to multiple buildings. It comprises a large
insulated tank (typically over 10m high for thermal stratification)
that stores chilled water generated when cooling demand is lower
and electricity is cheaper. This is then drawn upon during peak
cooling periods or when electricity is more expensive.
The benefits of chilled water storage include:

•

Reduced peak electricity demand.

•

Reduce the number of chillers required to deliver peak
cooling capacity.

•

Increase resilience during power outages – to provide
cooling from the tank only requires a water pump to operate.

A practical guide for grid-optimised precincts

36

District heating can utilise a range of renewable heat sources
including solar thermal, biomass, biogas and ground source heat
pumps (including geothermal and sewer heat recovery). One
advantage of district heating is the ability to share heat energy
between buildings, particularly if lower grade heat can be used.
For example, heat rejection from cooling in some buildings (e.g.
data centres, refrigeration warehouses, offices) could be utilised
to reduce heating energy demand in other buildings (e.g. DHW in
residential and hospitals, leisure centre swimming pools). If a
precinct has these opportunities, then it will require a series of
pipes, pumps, heat exchangers, meters and controls to make it
work.

A practical guide for grid-optimised precincts

37

I All-electric
buildings

Existing buildings
with gas

All-electric precincts have all-electric buildings. This means that all
heating, domestic hot water and cooking will use electricity
instead of gas. This will require architects, mechanical, electrical
and hydraulic consultants to collaborate to optimise the design.
The GBCA Practical Guide to Electrification of New Buildings
provides guidance on key issues to consider.

Where a brownfield or campus precinct includes existing buildings
that use gas, then a strategy will need to be developed to support
the phase out the use of gas in those buildings over time.
The strategy should identify when the gas systems in the building
are reaching their end of life and what electrical infrastructure will
need to be in place in the precinct when they decide to switch
from gas to electric systems.

The buildings will also need to be designed to integrate with the
rest of the precinct, generating, storing and sharing energy to
reduce energy bills and minimise demand on the electricity grid.

The GBCA Practical Guide to Electrification of Existing Buildings
provides guidance on key issues to consider.

If the precinct developer is not delivering the buildings, and these
are being designed, constructed and operated by other parties,
then clear requirements will need to be established to ensure all
the buildings on the precinct ‘play nicely together.’

Space

Space needs to be provided for all-electric systems, noting that heat
pumps require more space than gas boilers. Space should also be
allocated for future energy storage systems such as batteries, and
for EV charging car parking spaces where appropriate

Ventilation

Air source heat pumps require good ventilation and are preferably
located outside.

Noise

If air-source heat pumps are external, then noise levels need to be
considered, particularly when located near neighbours.

Efficiency

New buildings should be designed to high performance standards,
and preferably better than minimum code compliance, to reduce the
demand for electricity. This includes setting minimum standards for:
•

building envelope insulation, glazing, shading and air tightness

•

energy efficiency of building services

•

water efficiency to reduce domestic hot water demand.

A practical guide for grid-optimised precincts

38

Infrastructure

Planning

The requirements will include both planning and engineering
design considerations as summarised below.

PV Panels

Rooftop solar PV is the cheapest form of electricity generation.
Encourage buildings to have both east and west facing PV
arrays to increase generation in mornings and afternoons and
smooth out the solar generation profile during the day.

EV charging

The sale of EVs is increasing significantly each year. Buildings
should be designed to allow easy installation of V2G EV
chargers in the future to meet consumer demand. The number,
type and location will depend on the building type
– but its likely every home will want one in the future.

Energy storage

Consumer-owned batteries located behind the meter in
buildings, will be a very significant component (> 50%) of the
national electricity storage capacity in Australia by 2050.
Designing the electrical infrastructure for the future installation
of batteries in buildings is a key requirement for new buildings.

Flexible demand
control

Reducing both peak electrical demand and the time of use of
electricity is a key requirement for a grid responsive precinct.
Buildings should include measures to manage demand include
load shifting (e.g., DHW generation), control of EV charging,
management of battery storage and smart controls, and grid
responsive controls.

A practical guide for grid-optimised precincts

39

Additional
considerations
for industrial &
logistics
precincts

PV & Embedded Networks

EV Truck charging

Industrial and logistics precincts typically have large lots,
sophisticated commercial tenants, and large areas of roof for PV
electricity generation. On a precinct there may be a mix of
electrical demand profiles ranging from very low (storage
warehouses), medium (light industrial, refrigerated storage) and
high (manufacturing process and high heat food prep). This
makes them strong candidates for embedded networks. Benefits
include:

Electric trucks and commercial vehicles will require frequent
charging, presenting an ideal opportunity during loading,
unloading, or parking times in industrial and logistics areas. As
charging technology advances, the methods used will also
change. At present, AC charging is widely used for overnight
charging and remains suitable for many businesses. However, for
quick charging of heavy-duty truck batteries, such as during
drivers' meal and rest breaks, DC charging will be necessary. This
type of charging demands more power, necessitating a
specifically designed electrical infrastructure.

•

The precinct owner / ENO can invest in rooftop solar
systems and then sell the electricity generated within the
precinct, generating a return on investment.

•

The precinct owner / ENO can procure renewable grid
electricity in bulk, using long term Power Purchase
Agreements (PPAs) at lower prices than smaller customers,
and sell this to tenants, generating another revenue stream.

•

The tenants get cheaper and greener electricity.

•

If enabled by the ENO, the tenants can participate in
demand response initiatives to further reduce their
electricity costs.

Battery technology is advancing swiftly. For instance, when Volvo
introduced its first electric truck in 2019, the battery capacity was
200 kWh. Just four years later, the capacity had increased to 540
kWh.15 Another innovative approach under development is battery
swap stations, enabling the replacement of a truck's battery with
a fully charged one in less than 5 minutes.16
Additionally, it's vital to monitor progress in hydrogen-powered
transport, especially for logistics hubs serving tenants with
longer-haul needs. The focus should be on understanding the
current and future requirements of potential tenants and
designing the precinct to support their decarbonisation goals.

High heat industrial applications
Moorebank Logistics
Park, NSW

Industrial heat pumps are available internationally to deliver heat
up to 165°C. This is suitable for many industrial processes
including food and beverage, the second highest industrial heat
use in Australia.17 A study in 2022 identified that heat pumps up
to 90°C are already commercially viable in Australia.18

Solar Bay will install 60
MW of rooftop solar
across the estate and
150MWh of battery
energy storage to supply
the embedded network
with renewable
electricity.20

For applications which require temperatures up to 165°C
industrial heat pumps should be thoroughly evaluated. New
precincts can be designed for these electrical loads.
Ultra-high temperature heat pumps with supply temperatures
over 165°C are being developed and tested internationally.19
These typically use different technologies to typical heat pumps
for space heating and DHW in buildings. Where high heat
applications (> 165°C) are required on site, and industrial heat
pumps are not commercially available to deliver this, then
renewable options to consider include:

A practical guide for grid-optimised precincts

40

•

Biomass or biogas

•

Green hydrogen

•

Geothermal

•

Concentrating solar thermal with thermal storage.

A practical guide for grid-optimised precincts

41

Checklist of key issues for an all-electric, grid responsive precinct
Planning an all-electric precinct

All-electric, grid interactive buildings

Demand reduction and control

Has a vision and plan been prepared for an all-electric
precinct?

Has the precinct been planned and designed for all
buildings to be all-electric?

Has the precinct been designed to minimise peak loads to
reduce the impact on the electricity grid (generation and
supply infrastructure) to meet this demand?

•

Review ESG goals and customer expectations.

•

Confirm vision – all electric and/or fully grid
responsive.

•

Consult with key stakeholders and customers.

•

Start discussions with DNSPs early and identify
demand constraints and opportunities.

•

Ensure Precinct Structure Plan and master plan
covers easements and spatial provisions for electric
infrastructure and future proofing (e.g. batteries).

•

Develop a Precinct Energy Plan addressing key
technical requirements, infrastructure ownership and
commercial models.

•

Obtain DNSP connection agreement and
development approval.

Confirm electricity load profiles for the buildings on
the precinct (current and future) and size
infrastructure to support this demand.
Prepare guidance for building owners/developers on
the design requirements for all-electric, grid
responsive buildings.

Mandate the use of smart controls in all buildings on
the precinct, with a minimum requirement to help
manage and reduce peak loads.

Identify if there are any gas uses in the building that
cannot currently be switched to electric (e.g. some
industrial processes). Work with the building owner
to identify potential alternative fuels and, as a
minimum future proof to transition in the future (e.g.
industrial heat pumps, hydrogen pipes).

Discuss potential for grid-interactive control with the
DNSP and identify the controls, systems and
commercial arrangements required to facilitate this.

On-site renewables
Has the precinct been designed to optimise the
installation of on-site renewables?

Delivering precinct energy infrastructure
Have different commercial models for infrastructure
ownership and buying/selling electricity been reviewed,
and does the infrastructure design facilitate all of these to
be implemented either now or in the future?
•

•

Confirm who owns and manages the different
components of the electrical infrastructure in the
precinct – from the connection to the grid through to
the buildings.
Determine the cost of the electrical infrastructure,
payment mechanisms and funding opportunities.
This will include negotiating development charges
with the DNSP.

•

Assess different models of buying/selling electricity
in the precinct to determine most suitable based on
precinct type – DNSP, embedded network, microgrid,
VPP arrangements, etc.

•

Include requirements for building owners to comply
with load management and energy sharing
mechanisms as set out in the Precinct Energy Plan.

A practical guide for grid-optimised precincts

Set minimum requirements to reduce peak electricity
demand in the design of buildings.

Confirm the capacity of rooftop solar on buildings
aligns with the Precinct Energy Plan and how any
surplus generation will be managed
Identify opportunities for precinct solar systems,
including to provide shade for car parks and
pedestrians.
Investigate solar systems ownership models to allow
building/homeowners who can’t install solar power
to have access to the benefits.

EV charging infrastructure
Has the precinct been designed to support the transition
to all-electric vehicles?
Prepare an EV charging infrastructure plan to identify
where and when EV charging infrastructure will be
installed over time (buildings and public spaces) –
and ensure the electrical infrastructure has the
capacity for this.

Thermal energy
Has the precinct been designed to shift generation of heating
and cooling away from peak electricity demand periods?

Generate DHW during day and store for use during
morning and evening periods.
Review potential for chilled water storage in buildings
with high cooling demand.
Review potential for district heating or cooling
networks to share thermal energy within the precinct.

Batteries
Has the precinct been designed to store electricity when it is
cheap and abundant (typically during solar generation
hours) and utilise this electricity when electricity demand
and costs are higher?
Design infrastructure to support installation of
batteries and V2G EV chargers in every building.
Discuss with DNSP options for precinct batteries, both
to manage energy loads and for potential to reduce
size of infrastructure needed to supply the precinct.
Discuss with occupants of the precinct the potential to
install a community battery.

Ensure all precinct electrical infrastructure supports
V2G EV charging.

42

A practical guide for grid-optimised precincts

43

Paying for precinct
energy
infrastructure

In new precincts, electricity infrastructure is financed in part by
developers. The exact contributions vary, as they are subject to
negotiations with the Distribution Network Service Provider (DNSP).
There are no standards covering determining costs.

The cost of
maintaining gas
pipes

Proactive discussions with the DNSP on solutions that reduce
energy consumption, enhance energy generation and storage,
charge electric vehicle, and mitigate grid peak demands can lead to
decreased development charges for electricity infrastructure and
expedite the approval process.

The cost of
installing gas
pipes

This situation precipitates the network’s ‘death spiral': as
transmission and distribution expenses per consumer escalate, the
financial viability of remaining connected to the gas network
diminishes. This, in turn, propels more users towards electrification,
exacerbating the financial strain on those who remain.
Consequently, a network originally engineered for a substantially
larger customer base becomes disproportionately expensive to
maintain, leaving the dwindling number of gas consumers to
shoulder the escalating costs. This scenario not only leads to
increased charges for these consumers but also risks rendering the
gas infrastructure 'stranded'—an underutilised asset with prohibitive
upkeep expenses.

Gas infrastructure is regulated in many states, allowing gas
suppliers to fund the expansion of gas networks into and within
precincts through future customer billing.
In new developments, the cost of gas infrastructure is typically split
between developers, gas companies, and occasionally government
support, contingent on the project's specifics and regional
regulations.
Gas companies may invest in extending networks to serve new
areas, with possible developer contributions for expansions.
Government aid may come into play for key developments under
urban or energy strategies., thus reducing upfront costs for
developers.
Nonetheless, developers could incur costs for internal connections
and fees for network enhancements. Regulatory agencies, like the
Australian Energy Regulator (AER), set the framework for how these
costs are shared, often allowing recovery through consumer billing.
The end-users ultimately bear the infrastructure costs through
service charges, including network distribution (30%) and
transmission from the gas fields(16%).

35%

16%

Wholesale Market
The cost of gas as
determined by the
international market and
production costs.

Transmission
The cost of getting
gas from the gas
fields.

30%

Distribution cost
The cost of
maintaining the gas
distribution network
in the precinct or
city.

Preventative measures are vital to mitigate these challenges. A
critical initial step is to refrain from investing in new gas
infrastructure that is unlikely to deliver a return within its operational
lifespan. Moreover, comprehensive government policies and
strategic planning are essential to facilitate a swift, equitable
transition for existing buildings to cleaner, more cost-effective
energy solutions.

100%

Population using the network

0%

19%

Energy retailer
The energy
retailer’s costs and
profit margins.
Low

A breakdown of the costs of gas to the consumer

Cost of network per user

High

Explainer of the ‘death-spiral’ that happen to networks as they are abandoned due to rising costs.

(Adapted from ‘Our Pathway to Electrification’, ACT Government, 2022)

A practical guide for grid-optimised precincts

Currently, the costs associated with the transmission and
distribution of gas are distributed across a broad user base,
ensuring that individual charges remain relatively low. However, as
the trend towards electrification gains momentum and consumers
increasingly disconnect from the gas grid, the financial burden on
the remaining users intensifies.

44

A practical guide for grid-optimised precincts

45

Marketing an
all-electric
precinct

Investors

Buyers and occupants

An all-electric grid-interactive precinct is ready for the
decarbonisation of the grid. Designed well, they are highly efficient,
fossil fuel free, and powered by renewables. A precinct that achieves
these is likely to be aligned with the latest science and
recommendations from the following organisations:

Grid-interactive precincts are a sale feature for prospective buyers or
community occupants. Consumer attitudes are changing, and these
precincts offer an advantage over typical precincts. Options to
consider when communicating to customers include:

•

The Intergovernmental Panel for Climate Change (IPCC)

•

International Energy Agency’s net zero roadmap (IEA)

•

Taskforce for Climate-related Financial Disclosures (TCFD)

This precinct would also likely be aligned with the requirements of
the Climate Bonds Initiative,21 and in line with guidance from SBTI.22
The reason for this is simple – the precinct is less likely to become a
stranded asset as it features no fossil fuels and has the capacity to
draw its entire energy from renewable electricity generated in
Australia.
More information on how these precincts comply with multiple
sustainable finance frameworks is available in GBCA’s Practical
Guide for Sustainable Finance.

Planning authorities

•

“All-electric systems ensure lower energy consumption,
translating to significant cost savings on utilities.”

•

“Your home will leverage renewable energy and smart
technologies, drastically reducing your carbon footprint.”

•

“Benefit from reduced operational costs due to the efficiency of
electric systems.”

•

“Enjoy cleaner air and a healthier living environment, thanks to
the absence of fossil fuels.”

•

“The precinct’s infrastructure is futureproofed to changing
nature of electricity procurement.”

•

Climate Resilient: Features and materials selected to withstand
extreme weather and changing climate conditions, protecting
your investment.

Introducing all-electric grid-interactive precincts presents an
opportunity for sustainable urban development, combining the latest
in technological innovation with significant environmental and
community benefits.
By leveraging smart grid technologies, these precincts can efficiently
manage energy use in real-time, harnessing renewable energy
sources to significantly reduce carbon footprints and align with
broader environmental goals.
The economic benefits are equally compelling, with long-term cost
savings achieved through reduced energy expenses and
maintenance costs, alongside potential government incentives that
make these projects financially attractive.
Furthermore, the health and communal advantages cannot be
overstated; improved air quality contributes to better health
outcomes, while thoughtfully designed communal spaces foster a
strong sense of community.
Moreover, these precincts are designed with resilience in mind,
incorporating features that ensure adaptability to climate change
and technological advancements, ensuring their viability and
relevance well into the future. This holistic approach not only
addresses current urban challenges but also sets a forward-thinking
standard for sustainable living urban environments.

A practical guide for grid-optimised precincts

46

A practical guide for grid-optimised precincts

47

LEFT.
Ginninderry, ACT

Homes within Ginninderry’s first two suburbs of Strathnairn and
Macnamara are not only all-electric, but are also required to have
solar panels, home energy management systems, more efficient
reverse cycle air conditioning systems, as well as solar or heat
pump hot water systems. “These energy-saving measures are not
only better for the environment but help to reduce the cost of living
for our residents.” Jessica adds.
The team at Ginninderry continue to run workshops and
information sessions for residents and builders to ensure that they
understand the reasons behind the all-electric requirements
through the design and construction of their homes.
The team at Ginninderry has also future-proofed its suburbs by
allocating land for neighbourhood-scale batteries. These batteries,
when installed, will provide an additional layer of storage and
resilience to the electricity grid. Ginninderry has also run conduits
for EV Charging points to ensure that there is charging capability at
schools, commercial centres and neighbourhood parks.

Case study:
Ginninderry,
ACT
Location
ACT
Sector
Greenfield Residential

Developer
Riverview
Developments and
Suburban Land
Agencyelectric features
Key electric features
•

All electric

•

Solar PV

•

Precinct scale
batteries

•

EV charging

Paving the way for all electric developments in the ACT
Ginninderry, a Joint Venture between Riverview Developments
and the ACT Government’s Suburban Land Agency, is a
community with a difference. Aspiring to be a sustainable
community of international significance, Ginninderry will cater to
Canberra's needs as a growing city, eventually home to
approximately 11,500 homes and 30,000 people by 2055.

Ginninderry has been certified as a 6 Star Green Star –
Communities rated development by the Green Building Council of
Australia – a testament to its liveability and contribution to the
local economy, alongside it’s innovation in governance,
environmental considerations and design. Ginninderry is a
master-planned community which will extend from the ACT into
NSW and covers 1,600Ha of land, of which nearly 600Ha is
dedicated conservation land. Planned amenities within the
proposed 4 suburbs include new schools, shops, childcare
centres, medical centre and recreation facilities.
Ginninderry was the first development in Canberra designed
without natural gas – a move that required considerable
negotiation, given natural gas was mandated in the Territory Plan
at the time. Jessica Stewart, Ginninderry’s Sustainability Manager,
said “It was important for Ginninderry to build a community that
was future-proofed for rapid advances in technology and for a
changing climate.”

A practical guide for grid-optimised precincts

48

Ginninderry is creating a new
model for community-scale
energy systems. By working in
partnership with our energy
network providers, we hope that
our community can store and
generate renewable energy much
more efficiently.
Jessica Stewart, Sustainability Manager, Ginninderry

A practical guide for grid-optimised precincts

49

Case study:
The YARDS

Location
Sydney
Sector
Industrial

Developer
Frasers Property and
Aware Real Estate
Key electric features
•

All electric Solar
PV

•

Building based
embedded
networks

•

EV charging

Frasers Property Industrial and Aware Real Estate have showcased
the potential of an all-electric industrial precinct with The YARDS in
Kemps Creek, marking a significant achievement as Australia's first
Green Star Communities industrial precinct in May 2023, securing
the top 6 Star Green Star Communities v1.1 rating for 'world
leadership'.
Tamara Williams, Director of ESG at Altis Property Partners,
highlighted the project's distinctive approach: "We were really looking
for that point of difference to provide our customers not only a
pathway to their net zero targets, but also an experience at The
YARDS that no one had attempted in the industrial space." This
initiative caters to modern tenant needs and aims to prevent future
asset redundancy.
With gas accounting for nearly 30% of Australia's building energy
use, the venture actively supports an electric future by eliminating
fossil fuels. "Electrification is relatively easy in the logistics sector,
because most tenants are distributors – rather than manufacturers
– and they don’t need gas," they noted, aligning with the sector's
dynamics.
Each facility at The YARDS will incorporate rooftop solar panels, with
the partners planning to install at least 2MW across the estate.
Andrew Thai added, "We will be working with each customer to
identify opportunities to expand their rooftop solar array and procure
100% renewable energy." This effort is projected to reduce
greenhouse gas emissions by 85% compared to standard
operations, firmly supporting the tenants' sustainability journeys.

So far, they have worked with one lot to increase the deployment of
solar on the building, with the use of a building scale embedded
network. This means that an embedded network operator will own
the PV and associated electrical systems which make up the
embedded network on the lot and manage the energy generation
and where it flows. By doing this, the size of the system does not
need to be limited by the building’s energy needs, as excess energy
generated can be used on other buildings in the estate, or even in
other estates operated by the embedded network operator. The
tenant is offered 100% renewable electricity supply, which eliminates
the mismatch of solar generation and onsite electrical demand.
This approach to building scale embedded networks allows them to
maximise the deployment of solar on individual buildings in the
precinct. For this precinct, issues with public road easements
prohibited their ability for an embedded network encompassing the
whole precinct. This may not always be the case, however,
particularly if the planning for an embedded network occurs early.

A practical guide for grid-optimised precincts

50

ABOVE.
Artists Rendition of THE
YARDS

The transition to an all-electric model not only brought financial
advantages but also sparked new customer engagements.
Despite initial concerns about potentially limiting their tenant pool by
excluding gas, Andrew notes, "It was a worry. But demand has been
high from customers wanting to join us and be part of our vision."
He adds, "Some customers simply want a convenient location near
major road networks – and The YARDS provides that. But we believe
it is only a matter of time before net zero comes onto their radar.
And when it does, we have built an all-electric precinct that is ready
to help them." This reflects a confident outlook on the precinct's
alignment with future sustainability goals.

Our precinct is future proofed. By going all
electric from the outset, we don’t need to
spend any money stripping out gas down
the track. We just didn’t put it in.
Andrew Thai | Frasers Property Industrial’s National Sustainability Manager

A practical guide for grid-optimised precincts

51

LEFT.
Artist’s rendition of the
Harbour Shores

In the future, these chargers will also be available within the private
building car parks, and tenants may receive credit back from their
energy retailer if they minimise their energy use.
Leveraging the benefits of the “sunshine state”, the precinct has the
capacity to hold over 1,000kW of solar PV energy which will
generate over 1,642,500kWh of sustainable energy per year and
save more than 900,000kg CO2-e on average, year. Solar panels
will be deployed on the rooftops of each building, reducing energy
demand and bills. It is predicted the project will achieve a 34%
reduction in peak electricity consumption compared to a
contemporary reference development. This will help reduce
community wide loads during peak times, such as mornings and
evenings, when residents are at home and using appliances.

Paul Davy, Director, dsquared Consulting:
“Remarkably, building a fossil fuel free system had no significant
sizing impacts on the electrical substations. The variable timing
of when people use hot water and induction cooktops means
electrical infrastructure modelling isn’t impacted in any significant
way.”

Image credit: Kate Longley, Breathe Architecture

Case study:
Harbour
Shores
Location
Queensland
Sector
Residential
Developer
Lewis Land
Key electric features
•

Active transport

•

EV charging

•

Solar PV

•

All-electric
cooking

In August 2023, the ambitious sustainability vision for Lewis
Land’s latest mixed-use residential development was achieved.
Harbour Shores, located in Queensland, Australia, is Lewis Land’s
first fossil-fuel free, resort-style residential community and was
granted a 6 Star Green Star Communities v1.1 rating. Lewis Land
utilised dsquared Consulting throughout the planning and design
process to maximise sustainability outcomes ensure the project
is built to stand the test of time for generations to come.
Lewis Land is committed to a 100% electric development with no
natural gas usage within any operational energy. A typical
development of this scale would use 14,762,367MJ of natural
gas, so eliminating this entirely is an impressive feat with a 21%
reduction in greenhouse gas emissions. This means residents will
avoid pollutants from cooking or heating and experience high
quality, clean air.
To support the transition to low emission transport, a network of
footpaths and cycling infrastructure has been included in the plan
to encourage active and sustainable movement. Up to 75% of
parking in the plan will be allocated for electric vehicle charging
stations placed throughout the precinct. The load management
system within the basement will control charging distribution and
allocate energy in a dynamic fashion, meaning vehicles will only
use spare electricity from the building and anything more will
reduce the supply to the chargers.

A practical guide for grid-optimised precincts

52

We wanted Harbour Shores to be our
first completely fossil-fuel free
development by transitioning from gas.
We did this to ensure we were building
for the future and acting in a socially
responsible way. The success of this
development means this approach will
be used for future projects.
Michael Long, Head of Development, Lewis Land

A practical guide for grid-optimised precincts

53

Green Star
and allelectric
precincts

Green Star
Buildings v1

Launched by the Green Building Council of Australia in 2003,
Green Star is an internationally recognised rating system setting
the standard for healthy, resilient, positive buildings and places. In
summary, Green Star aims to:
Reduce the impact of climate change.

•

All new precinct infrastructure to be fossil fuel free.

•

Enhance our health and quality of life.

•

•

Restore and protect our planet’s biodiversity and
ecosystems.

A zero carbon action strategy to be developed for any existing
energy infrastructure and buildings on the precinct to
transition to be fossil fuel free, with a target date no later than
2035.

•

Drive resiliency in buildings, fit-outs and communities.

•

Contribute to market transformation and a sustainable
economy.

The tool will also encourage increasing use of public transport,
walking and cycling to reduce the reliance on cars.

Green Star Buildings rates the design and construction of new
and refurbished buildings. Introduced in 2020, it aims to deliver
healthy, resilient, and positive places for people and nature, built
responsibly and showcasing leadership.

Any building registering after 2022 must achieve the Climate
Positive Pathway to achieve either a 5 or a 6 Star rating. All
projects registering after 2025 must achieve the Climate Positive
Pathway to achieve any level of rating. Any building achieving
practical completion after 2030 must also meet the climate
positive pathway, irrespective of when they were registered.

Communities

Green Star Communities v2, to be released in 2024, will be
fundamentally different to first version of the tool. Its structure
and categories will align with Green Star Buildings v1. It will also
include a Climate Positive Pathway requiring:

•

To align with limiting global heating to a 1.5°C trajectory, a
Climate Positive Pathway was introduced. This includes a
mandatory requirement to be ‘fossil fuel free’ which means no
natural gas is allowed for space heating, domestic hot water and
cooking.

Green Star
Homes
Green Star

Green Star
Communities v2

Green Star Homes was released in 2021 and sets the first
certified standard for sustainable houses in Australia. It is
primarily aimed at volume home builders. The rating tool is
simpler that Green Star Buildings and focuses on three
categories:
•

Positive – fully electric, draught sealed, energy efficient and
powered by renewables.

•

Healthy – ventilated, comfortable and with low toxic
products.

•

Resilient – water efficient and climate change ready.

2023

Zero carbon
action plan

All ratings

Fossil fuel free

All ratings

Powered by
renewables*

All ratings

Upfront carbon
reductions*

All ratings (10%)

2026

2030

All ratings (20%)

All ratings (40%)

*Applies to buildings and infrastructure built, owned or operated by the applicant seeking a rating.
There are other credits that encourage the applicant to work with other owners to achieve the same
goals, but these are not required to achieve a rating.
Note that the credits outlined in the pathway are mandatory. There are still credits and criteria that
go above and beyond these requirements, seeking to influence and reward stakeholders to
decarbonise beyond what is in the control of the precinct applicant.

There are no points or star ratings. Certification is based on
achieving the required standards. This includes having no gas.

A practical guide for grid-optimised precincts

Requirement

54

A practical guide for grid-optimised precincts

55

Myths and
barriers

We interviewed many stakeholders. These
are answers to common questions we heard.

Using electricity isn’t
greener – we’re still
burning coal

The purpose of electrifying precincts is two-fold: encourage the
generation (and storage) of renewable energy, and to ensure we
aren’t locking in fossil fuel infrastructure for decades to come.
Electricity networks are decarbonising more rapidly than previous
projections. The Federal Government’s target is for 82%
renewables by 2030, this will likely happen faster than most
people realise.

The sun doesn’t always
shine on my solar PV
system, so we still need
coal

There will always be days when the sun doesn't shine much on a
precinct. But these cloudy days won’t be a problem for an
integrated electricity grid powered by renewables as there will be
a range of energy sources and storage feeding into the grid
including solar (in other locations where it is not cloudy that day),
wind, hydro, biogas, batteries, pumped hydro storage, etc. The
days of relying on a handful of large coal fired power stations to
power our society are rapidly coming to an end.

The cost of heating with
electric is more than with
gas

In most cases the cost of gas for space heating, hot water and
cooking is more expensive than using energy efficient electrical
systems (heat pumps and induction). If a building has solar
panels, then the net cost of electricity is significantly reduced. The
cost of gas is outside the control of the building user and will
fluctuate based on national and international energy markets. The
sun and the wind are not yet controlled by large corporations!

I have to install natural
gas to my building – it’s
the law!

It is no longer mandatory anywhere in Australia to install gas to
new developments. In 2023 the ACT Government went a step
further and banned the installation of gas in most new
developments. From 2024 gas connections to new residential
development in Victoria will be prohibited. Other states are likely
to follow suit in the future to have any chance of meeting their
zero carbon targets.

What about carbon
offsets?

Offsets should not be used to offset emissions that can be readily
eliminated through design choices. This includes eliminating gas
in precincts and buildings. Credible net zero carbon standards will
not allow offsets for natural gas in new buildings. Many offsets
have questionable integrity, and companies relying on offsets to
claim net zero status could find themselves facing accusations of
greenwashing.

A practical guide for grid-optimised precincts

56

The technology isn't
sufficiently mature

Heat pumps and induction equipment have been around for many
years, are technically robust and readily available. Induction
cooking is becoming increasingly common in Europe and Asia. You
can now buy induction cooktops at IKEA and Bunnings. With the
increase in demand, the pace of innovation is only likely to increase
further leading to even better efficiencies, lower capital costs and
lower energy bills.

The electrical
infrastructure capacity
isn't large enough

New precincts can be designed to be all electric from the outset.
To manage the peak electrical demand, which influences capacity
requirements, a range of measures can be introduced including
energy storage (building batteries, precinct batteries and V2H/G
electric vehicle charging) and grid interactive buildings to manage
peak loads across the precinct.

Homeowners only want
gas for cooking

People often like what they are used to. However, when people
switch to induction, and quickly adapt to how it works, they
typically do not want to go back to gas. Induction is faster, safer
and easier to clean. Another big driver in homes is eliminating air
pollutants including Nitrogen Dioxide and particulates (PM2.5).
Studies have shown these can have a comparable risk of asthma
to a child living with household cigarette smoke.23

Electric cooking isn’t
suitable for commercial
kitchens

Induction cooking is faster (up to 60% more efficient energy
transfer) and provides instant response to changes in controls.
There are far more choices becoming available as more equipment
comes to market (including high intensity wok cookers), the
technologies evolve to meet consumer expectations, and training is
provided on how to adapt to different equipment. Leading chefs
agree, with induction cooktops increasingly used in top restaurants
because they are faster, more controllable and easier to clean.
They also improve the work environment for staff by reducing heat,
noise and air pollutants.

Should I build gas now
and convert later?

No. Installing gas infrastructure in the precinct is an unnecessary
upfront capital cost. It will also incur costs to maintain over its life.
This cost burden will be met by a dwindling number of customers
as more buildings choose to disconnect from gas and go allelectric. Companies also risk negative publicity for greenwashing if
they install gas in ‘green’ developments they market as being
sustainable.

A practical guide for grid-optimised precincts

57

Can we use green gas
(biogas and green
hydrogen)?

A common myth, promoted enthusiastically by the gas industry
and their supporters, is that we don’t need to electrify buildings
because the gas grid will transition to green gas (biogas, syngas,
green hydrogen or a combination of these). The gas industry is
less enthusiastic in stating how much green gas they will produce
(not a lot), where it will be sourced from (to be confirmed), when it
will be available (sometime in the distant future), and how it will
upgrade both the network and systems in buildings for this gas (it
can’t, normal appliances can’t use hydrogen or blended gases with
more than 5% hydrogen). A primary purpose of promoting green
gas in buildings is to maintain gas profits for as long as possible
by delaying action to phase it out.
Even if green gas was available to provide heat in buildings, it is a
very inefficient and expensive use of a limited energy resource
(see diagrams). Biogas and green hydrogen are likely to have an
important role in decarbonising our economy, but only in sectors
such as transport and heat intensive manufacturing processes.

> 4 times more heat output in buildings using renewable
electricity directly in heat pumps rather than converting to
Green Hydrogen and using boilers to generate heat

2.7 MWh
of heat
1 MWh of
renewable
electricity
Building Electrification

Green Hydrogen in Buildings

Use renewable electricity distributed
via electricity grid to supply heat pump
with COP of 3

Convert renewable electricity locally
into green hydrogen, compress, store,
transport to building, store and then
supply 90% efficient hydrogen boiler

Electrification of heating and cooking in buildings can be delivered
today, using available and proven technologies and renewable
energy resources. There is no need to wait for potential future
energy industries to be developed, or to spend billions of dollars
upgrading pipework and equipment to transport these renewable
fuels to buildings.

Biogas
Biogas is typically generated in landfill or from agricultural byproducts, many of which are remotely located. Connecting biogas
production sources to the existing gas grid could be expensive. In
2020-21 biogas represented around 1% of the total gas
consumption in Australia25, mostly consumed local to the source.

Green hydrogen

Generating electricity near the source of biogas, then exporting to
the electricity grid, is a far more effective use of this limited
resource.26 If sufficient storage is provided, these biogas power
stations could potentially provide on-demand power to help
manage peak loads and support grid stability.

Green hydrogen is produced by electrolysis using water and
renewable electricity. This is then compressed, stored and
transported to where it is used. The total losses in the H2 process
are currently around 40%, but as the industry develops the losses
will potentially reduce to around 33% (as shown in the diagram
opposite).24 For green hydrogen production to be viable, a cheap
supply of renewable electricity is required.

50% more heat output in buildings using biogas to generate
renewable electricity for heat pumps rather than piping it to
precincts to generate heat using gas boilers

Using the renewable electricity to power heat pumps creates at
least four times more heat in buildings than using the same
electricity to create and transport green hydrogen to buildings.
Transforming the gas network and buildings to use green
hydrogen is substantially more difficult, time consuming and
expensive than adding renewables to the electricity grid. The
current gas infrastructure may need to be substantially upgraded
to carry pure hydrogen (the hydrogen molecules are smaller and
also react with steel to reduce expected life). Every building in the
network would also need to have its equipment adapted or
replaced prior to switching over to hydrogen.

A practical guide for grid-optimised precincts

58

0.6 MWh
of heat

1.35 MWh
of heat

1 MWh of
biogas

0.85 MWh
of heat

Building Electrification

Biogas in Buildings

Convert biogas to electricity in gas
turbine, feed into electricity grid and
supply heat pump with COP of 3

Transport biogas to building via natural
gas pipelines and supply 90% efficient
gas boiler

A practical guide for grid-optimised precincts

59

Appendix: Valuable terminology

Terminology to use when making claims

Carbon offset

A carbon offset refers to a mechanism that is used to compensate for emissions that occur
elsewhere. Many offsets have questionable integrity. Even good offsets are considered a
measure of last resort – they should be used to address unavoidable emissions such as Scope
3 emissions. Installing natural gas in new precincts is not considered unavoidable.

Emission
scopes

A mechanism for classifying different sources of greenhouse gas emissions used in carbon
accounting.27 There are three ‘scopes’:

GWP

Heat pumps

Hydrogen

•

•

Scope 2 covers indirect emissions from the consumption of purchased electricity, and
district heating and cooling.

•

Scope 3 covers activities not owned or controlled by the reporting organisation. This
includes production of fuels, electricity transmission losses, embodied carbon in
construction and maintenance (including materials and products), tenant energy
consumption, waste treatment, water treatment and travel to/from buildings.

Global Warming Potential (GWP) is a measure of the heat energy 1 tonne of a greenhouse gas
will absorb over 100 years compared to the emissions of 1 tonne of carbon dioxide (CO2). The
GWP of CO2 is 1. The GWP of methane (natural gas) over 20 years it is > 80 and over 100 years
is 28.
A heat pump is an electrical device that provides heating or cooling depending on which way
the refrigerant flows around the system. There are two types of heat pumps based on what the
evaporator (heat source) and condenser (heat delivery) are connected to.
•

‘Air source’ relies on outside air to heat the evaporator which transfers heat to the
condenser. Air source is commonly used across temperate and warm climate zones in
Australia.

•

‘Ground source’ uses water in pipes to transfer heat from the ground, aquifers or water
bodies to the heat pump condenser.

Hydrogen is a fuel that can be used to generate heat through combustion (similar to gas) or
used in fuel cells to create electricity through a chemical process. There are three common
ways to produce hydrogen fuel:

A net zero carbon building or precinct is one where there is a balance
between the amount of greenhouse gas produced and the amount removed
from the atmosphere on a net annual basis. It is a technical, though openended term. Its use must be accompanied by the focus on emissions, e.g.
net zero in operations, net zero for construction, etc.
Net zero claims are often unverified, and there is no agreed standard that
defines them at this stage.

Carbon neutral
A carbon neutral precinct, as defined in the Australian Government’s Climate
Active standard29, is a precinct that:
•

Measures the relevant GHG emissions within the precinct boundary.

•

Implements an emissions reduction strategy (noting there are no set
targets to meet for precincts or a requirement to be fossil fuel free).

•

Purchases renewable energy and/or carbon offsets to compensate for
the annual GHG emissions.

•

Independently validates the process using a third party.

Climate Positive

•

Green hydrogen is produced from renewable electricity. It is the only form of hydrogen that
can be considered to be low carbon.

The Climate Positive pathway30 in Green Star Buildings requires buildings to:

•

Blue hydrogen is produced from fossil fuels whose emissions have been captured and
stored. This is untested technology at scale and lifecycle studies28 have shown it to be
emissions intensive.

•

Meet an energy consumption target.

•

Meet an embodied carbon target.

•

Be fossil fuel free for space heating, domestic hot water and cooking.

•

Purchase 100% renewable electricity (Scope 2 GHG).

•

Purchase nature based offsets* for refrigerants (Scope 1 GHG).

•

Renewable
energy

Scope 1 covers direct emissions from owned or controlled sources. In a precinct this is
typically emissions from burning fossil fuels (e.g. diesel, natural gas and LPG), leakage of
fluorinated gases such as refrigerants, and fuel consumption of maintenance vehicles or
back-up generators.

Net zero carbon

Grey or brown hydrogen is produced from fossil fuels and is where most hydrogen
currently comes from. It is highly emissions intensive.

Renewable energy is any source of energy that can be used without depleting its reserves
including sunlight or solar energy, wind, wave, biomass, and hydro energy. They are generally
classified as on-site renewable energy (where the generator is connected behind the meter), or
off-site (where the generator supplies to the grid and this electricity is procured). Off-site
procurement is a market-based method of procuring renewables, typically through a supplier
that produces large generation certificates (LGC) that have been retired to the regulator. More
information can be found here.
A practical guide for grid-optimised precincts

60

Green Star Climate Positive Pathway claims are verified through an
independent third party assessment process.
* - these have to be eligible under Climate Active but are limited to nature based offsets or similar carbon
removal offsets. More information can be found here4.

A practical guide for grid-optimised precincts

61

Appendix:
References

1,4,9 AEMO 2023, Draft 2024 Integrated System Plan for the National

18

Renewable energy for process heat - Opportunity study phase 2.
Final project knowledge sharing report, Australian Alliance for
Energy Productivity, March 2022
https://www.a2ep.org.au/process-heat-study

19

https://www.a2ep.org.au/heatpumps

Electricity Market https://aemo.com.au/consultations/currentand-closed-consultations/draft-2024-isp-consultation
2

3

5

6

From net zero to zero: A discussion paper on grid-interactive
efficient buildings’, GBCA & Buildings Alive, June 2023.
https://new.gbca.org.au/green-star/green-starstrategy/electrification/

20 https://solarbay.com.au/project/moorebank-logistics-park

https://www.caiso.com/Documents/FlexibleResourcesHelp
Renewables_FastFacts.pdf
https://www.dcceew.gov.au/sites/default/files/documents/
national-electric-vehicle-strategy.pdf
https://www.accc.gov.au/consumers/petrol-and-fuel/petrol-pricecycles-in-major-cities accessed 16/9/2023

21

https://www.climatebonds.net/

22

https://sciencebasedtargets.org/

23

https://cooksafecoalition.org/fact-sheets/

24

For more information on these calculations contact the GBCA

25 Table 3 and Table 4, Australian Energy Update 2022, September

2022, Australian Government Department of Climate Change,
Energy, the Environment and Water

7

https://www.canstarblue.com.au/electricity/electric-vehiclepower-plans/
8

26

https://www.drive.com.au/caradvice/electric-cars-australia-2022longest-range/ accessed 16/9/2023

10 Tesla Battery Hornsdale, (2024)

https://hornsdalepowerreserve.com.au/
11 Image from Lot 163 at Waterlea, Vic, Stockland, Green Star

Homes Certified.

As defined in the Greenhouse Gas Protocol. World Resources
Institute & World Business Council for Sustainable Development.
(2015). The Greenhouse Gas Protocol – A Corporate Accounting
and Reporting Standard.​
https://ghgprotocol.org/sites/default/files/standards/ghgprotocol-revised.pdf
28

12 Ausgrid Community Battery (2021)

https://www.ausgrid.com.au/About-Us/News/communitybattery-trial
13

https://www.iea.org/energy-system/buildings/district-heating

15

https://www.volvotrucks.com/en-en/newsstories/insights/articles/2023/mar/electric-truck-charging-in-dailyoperations.html
16

https://www.januselectric.com.au/

17

Renewable Energy Options for Industrial Process Heat, Prepared
for ARENA, Nov 2019
https://arena.gov.au/assets/2019/11/renewable-energy-optionsfor-industrial-process-heat.pdf

A practical guide for grid-optimised precincts

62

Fore more information on these calculations contact the GBCA

27

Howarth, R. W. (2021, 1 October). How green is blue hydrogen?
Wiley Online Library.
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1002/ese3.956

29 Climate Active. (2022). https://www.climateactive.org.au/be-

climate-active/tools-and-resources/climate-active-carbon-neutralstandard-precincts
30

https://new.gbca.org.au/green-star/green-star-strategy/carbonclimate-change/#carbonpositive​

A practical guide for grid-optimised precincts

63

Delivery
team

•

Nick Alsop – Senior Manager Buildings, Precincts & Homes

•

Jorge Chapa – Chief Impact Officer

positivezero
•

David Clark – Director

Proudly funded by Boundless

A practical guide for grid-optimised precincts

64

A practical guide for grid-optimised precincts

