Discussion
Paper
June
2023

From net zero to zero

A discussion paper on grid-interactive
efficient buildings

Grid-interactive efficient buildings discussion paper v.1



01

contents

01
05
06

From Buildings Alive:
Craig Roussac,
Co-founder and CEO
Hao Huang, Head of
Research & Development

About this paper
The evolution of power generation
09
10
11

Brad Schultz, Head of
Customer Engagement
From the Green Building
Council of Australia

13
15

Jorge Chapa,
Chief Impact Officer
Taryn Cornell,
Senior Manager Strategy
& Development
Andrew Fischer, Head of
Policy and Research

24

Katy Dean, Policy Adviser
With thanks to:
Stephen White, Energy
Efficiency Leader, CSIRO

Funding provided by
NSW Government

The mission of the Office of
Energy and Climate Change
is to accelerate NSW’s
transformation to a sustainable
future. It delivers key strategies
and programs that focus on
addressing some of the most
significant issues facing our
state including energy reliability,
climate change and emissions
reduction. Its work is integral to
the state’s economy and is a key
pillar of NSW economic policy.

Grid-interactive efficient buildings discussion paper v.1



02

Distributed energy resources (DERs)
Virtual Power Plants (VPP)
24/7 renewable energy

International outlook
Australia’s energy market
15
16
17
17
21

The spot market
The rise of renewables
Transitioning from a single-sided to a two-sided market
The future of renewables in Australia
The changing nature of the energy market

Shifting the peak
25

Addressing the

29

The built environment’s role in the transition

37

Case Studies

43

Unlocking the potential of grid-interactive efficient buildings

51

Our role in driving grid-interactive efficient buildings

Ian Lieblich,
Head of ESG, EG Funds

Funding has been provided
for this report by the NSW
Government. This report does
not however, represent the
views or policy of the NSW
Government.

Executive summary

57
59
61
67

30
32

38
39
40
41

43
44
49
51
52
53
54
55
56

What is a grid-interactive efficient building?
Potential benefits

University of Technology Sydney: Dr Chau Chak Wing Building
Grosvenor Place
EG Funds Management
Sydney Opera House

Stakeholders
From challenge to opportunity
Roadmap
Delivering climate positive grid-interactive efficient buildings
Driving a climate positive built environment
Advocating for grid-interactive efficient buildings
A grid-interactive Green Star
From peak electricity demand reduction to grid resilience in Green Star
Next steps in Green Star

Taking action today is critical
Appendix A: definitions
Appendix B: Calculating the benefits of grid-interactive buildings
Appendix C: A review of industry knowledge

Executive
summary
1. Assuming an average home
emits 15 tons of CO2 per year

The Australian Government
has set a goal to move our
electricity grid from 36%
renewable energy to 82%, by
2030, in line with Paris targets.
But as we race toward this
target, we also need to ensure
our buildings will be fit for
purpose in a zero-carbon world.
In order to drive the built
environment from net zero
to zero, our buildings need to
become grid-interactive. This
means they are electrified,
efficient, smart and flexible, so
they can support clean energy
generation by shifting load to
ensure energy is used when it is
at its cheapest and cleanest.
Buildings consume
approximately 50% of
Australia’s electricity, but during
peak periods, they consume
around 77% of system capacity.
By shifting one third of the
load in buildings for just three
hours a day, five days a week,
we would reduce Australia’s
annual Greenhouse Gas (GHG)
emissions by 0.6% (equivalent
to 180,000 homes),1 without
decreasing energy use; and
reduce the cost of supplying
electricity to Australia’s
buildings by $1.7 billion each
year.

sources. Grid-interactive
efficient buildings can increase
grid stability, resilience, and
efficiency, to ultimately reduce
the need for fossil fuel use and
greenhouse gas emissions.
They can shift demand to times
when ample cleaner, more
affordable power is available,
providing a much more
balanced load demand and
lowering costs for consumers.
If a building owner knows
when the energy supply is
peaking, they can match the
demand to create an efficient
market. Likewise, when the
energy supply is low, demand
can be reduced to avoid
peak pricing events. This is
done, for example, by using
air conditioners to pre-cool
buildings before the late
afternoon peak in temperature
and corresponding peak in
wholesale prices.
These measures must
obviously be used within an
efficient system that enables
the building to retain the effects
through measures such as
insulation and shading.

A load shift of this magnitude
would be a revolution in how
Australia invests in the peak
capacity of the electricity
The potential for grid-interactive system. It would effectively
efficient buildings to align
provide new peak capacity for
our environmental outcomes
other energy users, equivalent
with economic outcomes
to half of Australia’s existing
is enormous. They can help
coal fleet (52% of rated
to cut energy costs, ease
capacity) or more than all
demand on over-stretched
of Australia’s gas and diesel
networks and support the
generators (108%).
transition to renewable energy

Grid-interactive efficient buildings discussion paper v.1



01

Additionally, having a gridinteractive efficient building
allows owners to understand
their true carbon footprint. We
know that every kWh of energy
a building uses doesn’t have
the same carbon content. If the
owner had a live understanding
of the carbon content of energy
being used, they can utilise
load shifting and demand
management as new levers to
reduce emissions.
A grid-interactive efficient
building would use renewable
energy to shift its peak at the
right times through demand
management. The International
Energy Agency (IEA) calls these
‘zero-carbon-ready’ buildings.
A zero-carbon-ready building
can use 24/7 renewable energy,
meaning that every kilowatthour of electricity consumption
is met with carbon-free
electricity sources, every hour
of every day, everywhere.
Enhanced demand flexibility
will be essential to transition
to high levels of renewables
at a reasonable cost and to
fill the growing load balancing
gap. For this to happen,
demand flexibility, or the use
of communication and control
technologies to shift electricity
use throughout the day, must
evolve into a reliable resource
that is incorporated into energy
procurement and forecasting
processes.

With coordinated action
from grid-interactive efficient
buildings:
T
 he clean energy transition
and electrification of the built
environment will cost less
T
 he electricity system will be
more stable
R
 enewable energy
investment returns will be
higher
T
 he building sector will be
responsible for emitting less
carbon.
At GBCA, we’ve been working
to develop a set of principles
and actions that help the built
environment become more
grid-interactive. In short, to
continue transitioning from
net-zero to zero, buildings
should support grid stability
through increased flexibility and
reduced peak demand. This
need served as the basis for
the new grid resilience credit in
all new Green Star rating tools.
The principles will also support
our advocacy and education
program over the coming
years. Grid-interactivity is a
critical objective for the built
environment, and as we move
to continue decarbonising the
built environment, incorporating
grid-interactive strategies into
building design, operation,
and management will become
increasingly important.

Grid-interactive efficient buildings discussion paper v.1



02

Key recommendations for governments

2. A
 ppendix B provides further
references and calculations
related to these numbers

GBCA has identified 3 key areas for governments to focus their efforts on.
 eview building codes and
1. R
standards to accelerate
the deployment of gridinteractive technologies
as the grid decarbonises.
GBCA recommends introducing
consideration for grid-interactive
technologies in buildings as part
of the Australian Building Codes
Board’s workplan. This is in line with
recommendations from the IEA. In the
short term, we support reviewing the
content of the NCC and its supporting
standards to ensure all new buildings
are designed and delivered as allelectric buildings. GBCA recommends
that the Australian Government,
working with state and territory
governments should:
Introduce requirements for all
electric solutions for heating,
cooking, and hot water in buildings
Introduce requirements to account
for the future electrification of the
transport fleet and the effects on
the building’s electrical systems
Explore further requirements for
grid-interactive technologies,
such as demand controlled
air conditioning systems, for
introduction in future updates of
the National Construction Code.

2. C
 ontinue with efforts to
decarbonise the grid, and
enable grid-integration

3. I nvest in applied research
and provide information
and tools

GBCA recommends that all levels of
government:

GBCA recommends that the
Australian Government, working
with state and territory governments
should:

Explore how incentive or rating
programs, such as NABERS, can be
used to incentivise electrification
and grid-interactive solutions in the
built environment
Provide guidance on how to ensure
utility infrastructure is upgraded to
address the increase in electricity
demand and interactive solutions
Develop a digital strategy that
will allow for the integration of
buildings as distributed energy
resource (DER) nodes in the
electricity system through better
use of data flows and appropriate
software, including directing
renewable energy generation
to the points of best use,
coordinating batteries in millions
of electric vehicles (via buildings),
synchronising heat pumps,
hot water systems and other
appliances

Undertake research to understand
further opportunities for gridinteractive efficient buildings
Explore how to improve the
current renewable energy
certificate schemes to add realtime information in preparation
of potential changes to the
Greenhouse Gas Emissions
Protocol

The opportunity in numbers2
B
 uildings consume approximately
50% of Australia’s electricity

 Shifting the load for three hours per
day, five days per week, would:

A
 pproximately 77% of Australia’s
electricity system capacity at peak
times is used by residential and
non-residential buildings

R
 educe Australia’s annual
Greenhouse Gas (GHG)
emissions by 0.6% (equivalent
to the emissions of 180,000
homes), without decreasing
energy use.

R
 educe the cost of supplying
electricity to Australia’s buildings by
$1.7 billion each year

With thanks to our
Climate Positive
partners

This paper outlines the opportunities that grid-interactive
efficient buildings present for building owners, energy market
operators, retailers, service providers and policy makers. It
provides recommendations on behaviour changes and policy
drivers which would enable these outcomes.

Pilot digitalisation technologies
and establish a program
to implement digitalisation
technology and demand flexibility
in government buildings
Provide incentives, clear
communication, and education to
promote opportunities for testing
and delivering grid-interactive
efficient buildings at scale.

Introduce obligations for
retailers to engage with / support
customers on active efficiency
measures.

Grid-interactive efficient buildings discussion paper v.1

03

Grid-interactive efficient buildings discussion paper v.1

04

About this paper

This paper aims to start a
conversation on the role of GBCA and
its members in understanding the
impact of the built environment on a
rapidly transforming electricity grid,
and vice-versa, as well as to outline
opportunities in this transformation.
It is intended to serve both as a
primer, and as a discussion paper
on the topic. Feedback for this
paper can be submitted here.
This paper is broadly structured to
provide the following information:
 A primer on the grid in Australia
A
 review of the current state
of renewables, and an analysis
of how the built environment
interacts with the transition to
a stable decarbonised grid
A
 discussion paper aiming to
help industry identify its role in
the clean energy transition

The evolution
of power
generation

This discussion paper is geared to:
G
 overnment policy makers
and energy market regulators,
including AEMO
E
 nergy-market consultants
and experts in the wholesale
demand response mechanism

3. IRENA, Renewable Power
Generation Costs in 2021. Accessed
April 2023

 Energy retailers
 Portfolio managers

4. IRENA, Renewable Power
Generation Costs in 2021. Accessed
April 2023

 Heads of sustainability

5. OpenNEM, Accessed April 2023

 Building owners and operators

 Sustainability consultants
 Engineering professionals.
The outcomes of several industry
workshops are presented throughout
this paper in boxes with a grey
background. These are intended
to help drive discussion and seek
feedback on future actions. Questions
to the reader to prompt feedback
are presented in blue boxes.

The state of industry
Three workshops were conducted to understand industry perception of the
built environment and the evolution of the grid towards 100% renewables.
The findings of these workshops were used to shape the discussion points
in the rest of the paper. The workshops involved 30 participants from
building developers, consultants, utility companies, service providers, and
policymakers. A more detailed summary of the workshops is provided in
Appendix C.

Current situation

The Australian economy is fast
approaching a tipping point, with
27% of electricity in the National
Electricity Market (NEM) coming
from non-dispatchable renewable
sources in 2022, up from 9% in 2017
and less than 1% as recently as
2009.5 In fact, it is now expected to
be close to 80% by 2035 or earlier.
This change in the source of
energy in our electricity grid is
emerging in three key ways:

Dispatchable to non-dispatchable
Whilst the increase in renewable
energy means more generation
capacity is available, the amount can
vary based on weather conditions.
Whenever the sun is shining and the
wind is blowing, renewables are being
produced, and are oftentimes the
dominant source of energy on the grid.
While renewables can’t be generated
on demand, they are much easier to
curtail than fossil fuel solutions. This
means that preference in the market
is currently given to keeping fossil
fuel sources running, with renewables
being curtailed when demand is low.
Carbon intensity
When zero emissions renewable
energy is available and demand exists
for it, electricity is at its cheapest
and cleanest. When this matching
of supply and demand doesn’t
occur and renewables are curtailed,
fossil fuel plants take over which
leads to higher emission electricity.
The correlation between electricity
wholesale prices and carbon intensity
is becoming stronger – the cleanest
electricity is usually the cheapest.

A
 reduction in the carbon intensity
of the grid, in total but also
varying by time of day based
on the source of the energy

 On-site energy production and storage
 Energy efficiency and demand management

A
 rise in price variability
including an increase in
negative pricing events.

 Measurement and verification
Other actions noted included preparing for the integration of distributed
energy resources through studies and participating in demand
management and information analytics research projects.



This model is evolving. Power grids
are diversifying with renewables.
According to the International
Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA),
unsubsidised renewable energy is
often the cheapest source of energy
generation.3 Globally, renewable
energy added in 2021 was forecast
to reduce electricity generation costs
by at least $55 billion in 2022.4

These combined factors mean
there is a shift away from a onedirectional market driven by demand,
to a two-directional market, driven
by matching supply (of nondispatchable power) and demand.

A
 shift from dispatchable to
non-dispatchable energy, with
curtailment events increasing

The workshops broadly indicated that participants were becoming more
sophisticated in their approaches to managing their building’s impacts on
the grid. In summary, participants noted three actions at the building level
that they were working on, or towards:

Grid-interactive efficient buildings discussion paper v.1

The 20th century power generation
model was one-sided: coal, gas,
or hydro power plants supplied
electricity via a transmission and
distribution network. Electricity
supply would vary with demand,
not the other way around, with
broad pricing signals used to help
incentivise some change in demand.
To help smooth out demand and
encourage electricity at times where
demand was low, ‘peak’ and ‘off-peak’
electricity tariffs were created. They
helped maintain network stability.

05

Grid-interactive efficient buildings discussion paper v.1



06

6. AEMO, 2022 Integrated System
Plan, Accessed April 2023

Price variability
Currently, the wholesale price of
electricity on the National Energy
Market – the price that electricity
generators and retailers trade
electricity at to sell to consumers – is
extremely volatile. It can range from
negative $1,000 per megawatt hour
(-$1/kWh) to $15,000/MWh ($15.00/
kWh) at times of peak demand. This
spread in pricing, which can occur
within a period of hours, reflects
the fact that consumer demand
is generally unresponsive to price
signals because consumers pay fixed
contract rates for their electricity.
In the next five years,6 13% of the
NEM’s dispatchable capacity is slated
to be removed with the retirement of
7GW of coal-fired generators. This
will place significant upward pressure
on electricity prices, particularly
in the mornings and evenings.
The influx of daytime renewable
electricity has also seen an increase
in negative price events in electricity
networks, which are situations where
due to oversupply the wholesale
price of electricity drops below zero,
meaning that generators must pay
to supply power to the grid. Negative
prices are becoming more frequent

FIGURE 1

and more extreme in some electricity
markets, as the penetration of
renewable energy increases and
the demand for electricity changes.
They can occur for various reasons,
such as high renewable generation
(especially solar and wind), low
demand (due to energy efficiency,
distributed generation, or mild
weather), transmission constraints
(limiting the ability to export excess
power), or inflexible generation (such
as coal-fired plants that cannot ramp
down quickly). This poses challenges
and opportunities for the existing and
future participants in the electricity
sector, as they adapt to the changing
market dynamics and price signals.

The Duck Curve in California showing the progressive impact of renewables on
the grid

Graphing supply vs demand
The evolving daily demand profile has
a name: the ‘Duck Curve’. In 2013,
the California Independent System
Operator published a chart that is
now commonplace in conversations
about large-scale deployment of solar
photovoltaic (PV) power. The Duck
Curve named after its resemblance
to a duck shows the difference in
daily electricity demand and the
amount of available solar energy.

7.  US. Department of Energy,
Confronting the Duck Curve: How
to Address Over-Generation of
Solar Energy, Accessed April 2023
8.  The pattern has since been firmly
established and has extended
into Victoria, see: https://aemo.
com.au/-/media/files/majorpublications/qed/2023/qed-q12023-report.pdf
9. AEMO, maintaining-operationaldemand-in-south-australia.pdf
(aemo.com.au), Accessed April
2023

As illustrated by California’s ‘Duck
Curve’, increased investment in largescale solar and wind generation leads
to more electricity generation hitting
the system, and growth in rooftop
solar reduces demand on the system.
Increased penetration of home air
conditioning and electrification of
cooking increase the evening peak.
Combined, this leads to excess
supply when the sun is shining and
wind is blowing, and shortfalls when
it is not, which is reflected in the
behaviour of wholesale markets.

Due to the success of renewables
in South Australia there has been
oversupply of renewable energy
during the day. This meant that
the average price of electricity was
negative from 9:30 am to 3:30 pm
during the first three months of
2021.8 Essentially there was too
much electricity being supplied
at this time. Because of this, after
putting in place ‘emergency’ powers,
the market operator ‘tripped’ 12,000
solar generation units on purpose in
March 2021 to keep the grid stable.9

As noted by the California Independent
System Operator, the Duck Curve is
a threat to grid stability. It drives up
infrastructure costs, and it devalues
the contribution of renewable energy.7

This is again shown by the experience
of South Australia, where the average
wholesale price paid for energy made
by rooftop solar panels in early 2021
was 0.9c/kWh, while gas generators in
the same market were paid an average
of 8.5c/kWh, almost 10 times more.

South Australia’s experience provides
insight into the challenges electricity
networks face with the growth of
cheap renewable energy supply.

Grid-interactive efficient buildings discussion paper v.1



07

Grid-interactive efficient buildings discussion paper v.1



08

Distributed
energy resources


10. ESB, Integration of Consumer
Energy Resources (CER) and
flexible demand (2023), Accessed
April 2023
11. Energy Networks Australia,
Electricity Network Transformation
Roadmap, Accessed April 2023
12. ESB, op. cit.
13. ARENA, What are distributed energy
sources, Accessed April 2023
14. AEMO, Engineering Roadmap to
100% Renewables, Accessed April
2023

In Australia, distributed energy
resources (DERs) such as rooftop
photovoltaics and home batteries are
becoming more popular, with one in
four homes now having solar.10 The
Electricity Network Transformation
Roadmap, a joint publication by
Energy Networks Australia and the
CSIRO, estimated that over 40% of
energy customers will use a DER by
2027.11 By 2030, the Australian Energy
Market Operator (AEMO) expects
around 50% of consumers, including
large businesses, to use some form
of distributed energy resources to
participate in the demand side of
the national electricity market.12
The increasing penetration of
DERs offers a raft of benefits and
opportunities. Customers with
DER assets generally pay less for
electricity. This is because of two
reasons, the first is that once capital
costs are recovered, the electricity
that is produced and consumed
within their activities is effectively
cheaper than electricity procured
through retailers. The second is that
they can sell power back to the grid
or are compensated for using their
storage systems to help stabilise
the grid during peak periods. Cost
savings also apply to the overall

energy network. With consumers
investing in their own DERs, power
network expansion costs could be
reduced by as much as 60% between
now and 2050.13 Finally, DERs can
help balance the grid, improving its
reliability, particularly in the wake
of increased reliance on variable
energy sources like wind and solar.
However, there are some constraints
today. Currently, only so many DERs
can be connected to, and operated
by, a distribution network due to
hosting capacity. In addition, DERs
can only be integrated into the power
grid within acceptable risk levels
to network safety of reliability. It is
likely that the power grid will require
upgrades and modernisation to safely
integrate DERs into the network.14
The effective integration of DERs
and flexible demand is key to the
future of the NEM. As such, the
Energy Security Board released the
Post-2025 DER Implementation Plan
in October 2021. The Plan outlines
several reforms to support Australia’s
grid and deliver better outcomes
for customers and businesses.

Grid-interactive efficient buildings discussion paper v.1



09

Virtual Power Plants

The growing popularity of DERs has
given rise to Virtual Power Plants
(VPPs). A VPP is a network of DERs
that work together to effectively form
one single power plant. Leveraging
communications technology and
sophisticated software, a VPP
operator can charge or discharge
energy from their generating resources

and batteries and trade it on the
NEM. VPPs amplify the benefits of
DERs. With many DERs working
together, small individual actions can
compound to deliver large amounts
of energy to help support the grid in
times of need and reduce customer
power bills at the same time.

The South Australia Virtual Power Plant
Operational since 2018, the South Australia Virtual Power Plant (SA VPP)
was Australia’s first VPP, and the world’s largest. A growing network
of homes with solar and home battery systems, it was designed to
demonstrate how a VPP can reduce energy costs for participating
households and support the energy grid to reduce energy costs for all
South Australians. The first VPP in Australia to help stabilise the grid, SA
VPP has assisted with:
 A tripped power station in Queensland – in October 2019
D
 isconnections of the grid between South Australia and Victoria
– in November 2019 and January 2020
P
 roviding power to Port Lincoln residents during catastrophic fire
– in November 2019
 High and low power supply issues – in December 2019.

Grid-interactive efficient buildings discussion paper v.1



10

24/7 renewable energy
15. Xu, Q., & Jenkins, J., Princeton
University, Electricity System and
Market Impacts of Time-based
Attribute Trading and 24/7 Carbonfree Electricity Procurement,
Accessed April 2023
16. Rocky Mountain Institute (RMI),
Clean Power by the Hour, Accessed
April 2023

Renewable energy sources such as
wind and solar are becoming more
affordable and widespread, but they
also face a major challenge: how
to provide reliable and consistent
power. This is where the concept of
24/7 renewable energy comes in.
24/7 renewable energy means that
every kilowatt-hour of electricity
consumption is met with carbon-free
electricity sources, every hour of every
day, everywhere. It is both the end
state of a fully decarbonised electricity
system, and a transformative
approach to energy procurement,
supply, and policy design that is
critical to accelerating its arrival.
Some of the benefits of 24/7
renewable energy are:
It reduces greenhouse gas
emissions and mitigates
climate change by eliminating
the need for fossil fuels to
balance variable renewables
 It enhances energy security
and resilience by diversifying
the energy mix
 It supports economic development
and social equity by creating
jobs, lowering energy costs, and
improving access to clean and
affordable electricity for all.

A study by Princeton University15
analysed the electricity system-level
impacts of 24/7 carbon-free energy
procurement across two regional
power systems: California and the
Eastern Interconnection Grid in the
US (PJM Interconnection). The study
was concerned with whether 24/7
carbon free electricity procurement,
and associated technologies, would
build on the success of net renewable
purchases, to remove remaining
emissions as the grid decarbonises.
The study found that a shift to 24/7
carbon-free electricity enables deeper
emissions reductions and deeper
transformation of the electricity sector
than 100% annual matching by driving
early deployment of advanced clean
firm and long-duration energy storage
technologies. However, it comes with
a potentially significant cost premium
for early leaders, a premium paid
to accelerate innovation, maturity,
financeability, and widespread
availability of clean firm resources
that can make it much easier for
broader society to follow on the
path to a 100% carbon-free grid.

Clean Power by the Hour16
The Rocky Mountain Institute (RMI) report Clean Power by the Hour is a
comprehensive analysis of the benefits and challenges of implementing
time-of-use (TOU) electricity pricing in the United States. TOU pricing is
a dynamic pricing scheme that charges customers different rates for
electricity depending on the time of day and the level of demand. The
report argues that TOU pricing can help reduce greenhouse gas emissions,
lower customer bills, increase grid reliability, and enable greater integration
of renewable energy sources. The report also provides recommendations
for policymakers, regulators, utilities, and customers on how to design and
implement effective TOU pricing programs that are fair, transparent, and
customer-friendly.

Grid-interactive efficient buildings discussion paper v.1



11

Grid-interactive efficient buildings discussion paper v.1



12

International
outlook
17 IEA, Net Zero by 2050: A Roadmap
for the Global Energy Sector,
Accessed April 2023
18 UNEP, 2020 Global Status Report
for Buildings and Construction:
Towards a Zero-emissions, Efficient
and Resilient Buildings and
Construction Sector - Executive
Summary (unep.org). Accessed
April 2023
19 IEA, Demand Response, Technology
Deep Dive Demand Response
– technology deep dive, IEA,
September 2022. Accessed April
2023

The IEA in its roadmap for the global
energy sector, Net Zero by 2050,
has highlighted buildings as being
crucial to the transformation of the
global energy system required to
meet the decarbonisation objectives
of the Paris Agreement.17 This is
because buildings, through their
operations, consume more than half
(55%) of all electricity generation18
and therefore represent the largest
demand-side lever available to help
balance electricity networks and
support the continued growth in wind
and solar electricity generation. The

IEA has identified a significant role
for buildings in helping drive the next
wave of clean energy investment
through a blend of energy efficiency,
electrification, digitalisation, and
behaviour changes. Further, the IEA
notes that energy efficiency standards
for buildings need to include
connectivity and smart functionality
to drive demand response outcomes.
These are needed to unlock close
to 250GW globally in buildings
alone19 which will enable the net
zero by 2050 goals to be achieved.

… it is no longer sufficient to utilise energy efficiency only as a
static resource. Energy systems – new homes, replacement
heating and cooling equipment, industrial processes, and
the like – must be both highly efficient and flexible to the
maximum extent possible. Flexibility means interactivity with
the grid: the ability to manage energy usage, proactively and
situationally, to minimise both its cost drivers and its carbon
content.20

FIGURE 2

Demand response availability at times of highest flexibility needs and share in
total flexibility provision in the Net Zero Scenario, 2020 and 2023

20. Kenney, Michael, Heather
Bird, and Heriberto Rosales.
2019. 2019 California Energy
Efficiency Action Plan.
California Energy
Commission, 2019 California
Energy Efficiency Action
Plan. Publication Number:
CEC-400-2019-010-CMF,
Accessed April 2023
21. California Public Utilities
Commission, Assessment of
energy efficiency potential
and goals and modification
of portfolio approval and
oversight process, Accessed
April 2023

Much of this thinking is already being
operationalised in California by the
California Energy Commission (CEC)
through its Market Informed Demand
Automation Server (MIDAS), which
includes a database of current, future,
and historic time-varying electricity

prices and greenhouse gas emissions
intensities. As the CEC explained in
the Foreword to its 2019 California
Energy Efficiency Action Plan:

Grid-interactive efficient buildings discussion paper v.1

13

Their more recent report,21 two years later, then stated,

The current focus on first-year energy
savings only, in the form of kWh, kW,
and thermal savings, does not capture
all of the policy goals and benefits of
energy efficiency. The value of energy
efficiency varies significantly based
on the hour, season, GHG benefits,
climate zone, and lifecycle savings
of each measure. While these values
are captured in the cost-effectiveness
calculations, they do not come
together to represent a single goal
for the program administrators to
optimise around.

Grid-interactive efficient buildings discussion paper v.1

14

Australia’s
energy market

AEMO manages Australia’s two
wholesale electricity markets: the

National Energy Market (NEM), and the
Wholesale Electricity Market (WEM).22

25. Clean Energy Council, Clean Energy
Australia Report, Accessed April
2023

22. While most of this report discusses
the NEM, the issues it outlines apply
equally to the WEM. To simplify the
paper, the NEM is used throughout.

The spot market
23. AEMO, National Electricity Market
Fact Sheet. Accessed April 2023
24. https://www.aemo.com.au/-/
media/Files/Electricity/NEM/
National-Electricity-Market-FactSheet.pdf idem

The rise of renewables

26. https://www.cleanenergycouncil.
org.au/resources/resources-hub/
clean-energy-australia-report idem
27. There are multiple ways of engaging
in these agreements – While this
report won’t delve into the specifics,
there are many distinct benefits and
challenges with each, and they may
also lead to additional generation
being created in Australia. Those
entering into these agreements are
encouraged to review the issues
in detail. More information is
available in this guide for procuring
renewables by WWF.
28. Business Renewable Centre,
Corporate Renewable Power
Purchase Agreements in Australia:
State of the Market 2022. Accessed
April 2023

The NEM operates as a ‘pool’, or a spot
market, in which power supply and
demand are matched instantaneously
via a centrally coordinated dispatch
process. Generators offer to supply
the market with specified amounts of
electricity at specified prices for set
time periods and can re-submit the
offered amounts at any time. From
all the bids offered, AEMO decides
which generators will be deployed to
produce electricity, with the cheapest
generator put into operation first. The
wholesale electricity price received
by all generators is the price offered
by the last generator to be called on
at any given five-minute period.
The NEM is designed to meet
electricity demand in the most costefficient way. Electricity production is
matched to electricity consumption,
and spare generating capacity is
kept in reserve in case it’s needed.
Electricity production is also subject
to transmission limitations so that
the network is not overloaded.

The National Electricity Rules set a
maximum spot price, also known
as the Maximum Price Cap. Since
1 July 2020, this cap has been set
at $15,000 per megawatt hour and
is adjusted annually for inflation.23
The Rules also set a minimum spot
price, called the market floor price,
which is -$1,000 per megawatt
hour.24 The Australian Energy Market
Commission’s (AEMC) Reliability
Panel reviews the market price cap
and market floor price settings every
four years to ensure that they align
with the NEM reliability standard.
The WEM supplies electricity to the
south-west of Western Australia
via the South West Interconnected
System (SWIS). A unique feature of
the WEM is the Reserve Capacity
Mechanism, which ensures that
there is enough generation to
meet demand at all times.

Grid-interactive efficient buildings discussion paper v.1

29. https://businessrenewables.org.
au/wp-content/uploads/2021/12/
SOM22.pdf Idem

Renewable energy accounted for
32.5% of Australia’s total electricity
generation in 2021, a 5% increase
on 2020.25 Small-scale solar led this
growth, which added 3.3GW of new
capacity to record its fifth-straight
FIGURE 3

Electricity generation in Australia in 2021 in GWh (Clean Energy Council)9

Total grid
breakdown

15

Renewables
breakdown

59.1% Coal

35.86% Wind

32.5% Renewables

24.88% Small-scale solar

7.7%

21.58% Hydro

Gas

0.06% Non-metered fossilf fuels

12.29% Large-scale solar

0.1% Liquids

4.3%

Power Purchase Agreements (PPAs)
are gaining traction in Australia as
a cheaper and greener alternative
to ‘grid sourced’ energy. Under a
Corporate PPA, electricity users agree
to buy power or Large Generation
Certificates27 from a renewable
energy project at a fixed price longterm. The Australian Renewable
Energy Agency (ARENA) estimates
that 137 Corporate PPAs have been
negotiated for 5.6GW of renewable
energy generation since 2017.28
According to the Business
Renewables Centre Australia, the
market for large-scale renewable
energy has become more diverse
thanks to the increase in Corporate
PPAs, which now play a significant
role in the energy transition. While
retailer PPAs have slowed down due
to meeting their legislated purchase
obligations under the Renewable
Energy Target, investments in
large-scale renewable energy have
continued thanks to Corporate
PPAs and public sector retailers.29
Most developed energy markets
feature Energy Attribute Certificate
(EAC) schemes which allow



record-breaking year. Australia’s
leading source of renewable energy in
2021 was wind, which accounted for
35.9% of renewable generation, and
11.7% of total electricity generation.26

Bioenergy

consumers to ‘choose’, in an
accounting but not physical sense,
the source of energy used to generate
the electricity they use. In Australia,
these schemes include GreenPower™
and Renewable Energy Certificates
(RECs) comprising both small-scale
technology certificates (STCs) and
large-scale generation certificates
(LGCs). While many EAC schemes
have been successful in driving clean
energy investment over the past two
decades, none that are currently in
operation account for the emerging
challenges of managing the supply
and demand for renewable energy
generation at scale, in real-time.
With changing technology and
increasing temporal variability of
renewable energy supplies driven
by growth in wind and solar power,
international interest in ‘time-stamped’
certificates has begun to emerge.
(WEM) supplies electricity to the
south-west of Western Australia
via the South West Interconnected
System (SWIS). A unique feature of
the WEM is the Reserve Capacity
Mechanism, which ensures that there
is enough generation to meet demand
at all times.

Grid-interactive efficient buildings discussion paper v.1



16

Transitioning from a
single-sided to a twosided market

Historically, Australia’s energy
market has been single-sided,
reflecting one-way flow. Customers
have an agreed rate for electricity.
Real-time price fluctuations
are not a factor that customers
respond to, or even know about.
In a two-sided electricity market,
buyers and sellers both actively
respond to price fluctuations. Rather
than passively consuming power,
customers actively participate in the
market via demand management
and response.

The future of renewables
in Australia

AEMO has published its 2022
Integrated System Plan (ISP), which
outlines a 30-year roadmap of
investments for the NEM. The ISP
aims to efficiently enable low-cost,
firmed renewable energy - wind and
solar backed up by storage and new
transmission - to replace existing coal
generation. The ISP will help industry
participants, investors, governments,
and communities plan for the
decarbonisation of the power system
to deliver low-cost, firmed renewable
electricity with reliability and security.
As part of developing the ISP,
AEMO and stakeholders identified
the most likely future for the NEM,
called the ‘step change’ scenario,
which forecasts annual electricity
consumption from the grid to double
by 2050. This is due to a move away
from the use of natural gas for
direct energy consumption towards
electrification of existing energy
uses. To maintain a secure, reliable,
and affordable electricity supply for
consumers through this transition
to 2050, investment is required for
a nine-fold increase in grid-scale
wind and solar capacity, triple the
firming capacity, and a near fivefold increase in distributed solar.

In practice, this means that customers
monitor their power usage, and
consume less electricity when prices,
or carbon emissions, are high by
turning off appliances. Added to this,
excess electricity that is generated
by DERs is discharged or stored. This
type of firming helps to overcome
the challenges associated with the
‘Duck Curve’, while keeping wholesale
costs low. Transitioning to a two-sided
market will help secure the future
operation of the NEM and deliver
enduring benefits for consumers.

The step change scenario is a
consumer-led transformation of
the energy sector and coordinated
economy-wide action. It sees a
consistently fast-paced transition
from fossil fuel to renewable energy
in the NEM to fulfil Australia’s net
zero policy commitments. By 2050,
most consumers will rely on electricity
for heating and transport, and the
global manufacture of internalcombustion vehicles will have all
but ceased. Increased digitalisation,
such as smart meters, building
management systems, and demand
response enabled equipment helps
both demand management and grid
flexibility, and energy efficiency is as
important as electrification. There is
also a step change in global policy
commitments, supported by rapidly
falling costs of energy production,
including consumer devices. Some
domestic hydrogen production
supports the transport sector and
as a blended pipeline gas, with some
industrial applications after 2040.

30. AEMO, 2022 Integrated System
Plan. Accessed April 2023

FIGURE 4

NEM carbon budgets and the resulting emissions trajectories (AEMO 2022).30

This emission reductions profile in the step change scenario does include
a significant increase in the amount of available renewables in the grid
(Figure 4), with distributed storage and coordinated DER emerging
to provide three-quarters of dispatchable capacity (Figure 5).
FIGURE 5

Forecast NEM capacity to 2050, step change scenario, with transmission
(AEMO 2022)30

The emissions reductions in the step
change scenario are significant. By
2035, the NEM’s emissions will have
fallen 85% from 2021 levels. This is
due to a significant increase in the
penetration of renewable electricity.

Grid-interactive efficient buildings discussion paper v.1



17

Grid-interactive efficient buildings discussion paper v.1



18

31. AEMO, 2022 Integrated System
Plan. Accessed April 2023
32. ASBEC, Unlocking the pathway:
Why electrification is the key to net
zero buildings. Accessed April 2023

FIGURE 6

Forecast of MW storage capacity (left) and energy storage capacity (right),
step change (AEMO 2022).31

Unlocking the pathway: Why electrification is the
key to net zero buildings32
Published by the Australian Sustainable Built Environment Council
(ASBEC) in December 2022, this report highlights that Australia will
not achieve its legislated emissions reduction targets unless the built
environment decarbonises its building operations by electrifying. It
highlights that as noted by AEMO’s ISP, as the electricity grid decarbonises,
the remaining source of emissions – fossil gas burned for heating, hot
water and cooking – comes into sharper focus.
The report modelled three scenarios to determine which was the least
cost pathway to decarbonise the built environment – 100% electrification
(assuming the step change scenario), a combination of electrification and
green gas (hydrogen), and finally a combination of electrification, fossil
gas, hydrogen, and offsets (based on the progressive change scenario).
The findings clearly showed that electrifying the built environment would
deliver almost $50 billion in savings compared to business as usual. It
notes that for both other scenarios, the technologies were not available
at scale, more expensive, or relied on solutions which when considered in
totality were unachievable.

Grid-interactive efficient buildings discussion paper v.1



19

Grid-interactive efficient buildings discussion paper v.1



20

The changing nature of
the energy market
33. See breakout box on p.28 which
outlines the upcoming changes to
the greenhouse gas accounting
protocol later in this document

Recent changes to the NEM will help
to overcome some of the challenges
associated with the Duck Curve.
The wholesale market has been
opened to commercial and industrial
customers (through intermediaries)
who are be able to bid ‘demand
response units’ into the market as a
substitute for electricity generation.

In addition, the market has shifted
from half-hourly settlements to
five-minute settlements. Combined,
these changes can help support the
emergence of a genuine two-way
market that will operate in near-realtime, unlocking the full potential of
information technology, emerging
generation, and storage technologies.

Five-minute settlement
To deliver electricity, a dispatch price
must be determined. On 28 November
2017, the AEMC passed a ruling to
change the settlement period for the
electricity. Commencing on 1 October
2021, Five-Minute Settlement (5MS)
shifted the 30-minute wholesale
electricity spot market settlement
period to five minutes, providing a
better price signal for investment in
faster response technologies, such as
batteries and gas peaking generators.
5MS provides significant opportunities
for energy users to participate in
the market by way of demandresponse. Previously, the value of
demand response would have been
‘settled’ across a half hour interval,
meaning that to make a meaningful
contribution, a building would need
to significantly reduce demand over

a full half an hour. In a hypothetical
scenario, where buildings were able
to bid for demand response units
(they currently can’t), with 5MS
fast spikes in prices can potentially
be responded to immediately by a
brief cut in HVAC energy use (for
example), resulting in no noticeable
impact to the building’s indoor
conditions, but resulting in a small
windfall for the building operators.
In addition to this, five-minute
interval data will become critical
to active-efficiency and real-timecarbon management.33 Further
supporting this is the trend of
metering providers offering the option
to connect to clients’ data in ‘near
real time’, enabling data delivery
(and response to this information)
to happen as the day progresses.

34. AEMC, Wholesale demand response
mechanism, Accessed April 2023
35. AEMC, Wholesale demand response
mechanism final rule, Accessed
April 2023
36. Energy Transformation Taskforce,
Western Australia, Whole of System
Plan, Accessed April 2023
37. Energy Transformation Taskforce,
Western Australia, Distributed
Energy Resources Roadmap,
Accessed April 2023

Wholesale demand response
On 31 August 2018, the AEMC
received a rule change request from
the Public Interest Advocacy Centre
(PIAC), Total Environment Centre
(TEC) and The Australia Institute (TAI)
seeking to introduce a mechanism
for wholesale demand response in
the NEM.34 The Wholesale Demand
Response (WDR) mechanism was
included in the National Electricity
Rules in June 2020 after significant
public consultation. Commencing
on 24 October 2021, WDR enables
demand side (consumer) participation
in the NEM spot market at any
time, but it will most likely occur at
times of high electricity prices.
According to AEMC, this represents a
significant reform for the NEM. Under
this rule, consumers can sell demand
response in the wholesale market
either directly or through specialist
aggregators for the first time.35 This
rule introduces a low-cost mechanism
for transparently engaging the
demand side in central dispatch.

Since the NEM commenced, the
demand side has rarely participated
in the market. However, under this
mechanism, industrial electricity
customers, virtual power plants or
demand response aggregators will
be able to actively participate in
central dispatching electricity and be
rewarded for the value they provide
to the system. The rule is designed
to provide greater opportunities
for consumers to participate in the
wholesale market by bidding in
demand reductions as a substitute
for generation, thereby unlocking
under-utilised demand response in
the NEM. The mechanism is intended
to promote greater demand side
transparency, as well as price and
reliability-related benefits.
This new rule allows for new
technologies, particularly those
brought about by increased
digitalisation, to be valued within the
market. This is an important step on a
path toward a two-sided market.

Western Australia’s energy transformation
The Energy Transformation Taskforce
of Western Australia introduced
the ‘Whole of System Plan’36 report,
offering guidance to investors and
stakeholders in the region’s electricity
market. This report outlines four
scenarios, all aiming to achieve over
70% renewable energy sourcing
for the South-West Interconnected
System (SWIS) by 2040, under
the regulation of the WEM. In all
scenarios, distributed energy plays
a crucial role, with expectations
of growth from one in four
households to one in two by 2030.

causing daytime grid demand to drop
significantly, which may jeopardise
system stability if unaddressed.
Consequently, the Distributed
Energy Resources Roadmap37
was released. This report seeks to
establish a transition plan towards
a decentralised, democratised, and
data-driven power infrastructure.
It offers an overview of DER and
their transformative impact on the
electricity sector, as well as strategies
for integrating DERs into the power
system to bolster, rather than
undermine, overall system security.

The Taskforce highlights that the
rising prevalence of rooftop solar is

Grid-interactive efficient buildings discussion paper v.1



21

Grid-interactive efficient buildings discussion paper v.1



22

38. AEMO, Engineering Roadmap to
100% Renewables, Accessed April
2023

AEMO’s ‘Engineering Roadmap to 100 percent renewables’
The Australian Government has
set a goal to have 82% of energy in
the NEM sourced from renewables
by 2030. Inevitably, this will mean
that the entire grid will operate for
extended periods with generation
from wind and solar exceeding
demand, i.e., at 100% renewables. To
provide the power systems capable of
supporting this new and very different
operating environment, AEMO is
developing an engineering framework

that assumes the penetration of
renewables will reach 100% for
brief (approx. half-hour) periods as
early as 2025.38 AEMO’s Engineering
Roadmap addresses this challenge
under the assumption that there will
need to be significant distributed
storage and coordinated DER storage;
however there is no specific mention
of a demand-side contribution from
buildings, or the built environment.

Shifting the peak
39. PV Magazine, A tale of two causes
curtailment as renewable records
break’, Accessed April 2023
40. Alliance to Save Energy, Why
Demand Flexibility Is Essential For
Decarbonization, Accessed April
2023

Variability in renewable power
supply causes periods of over and
undersupply, and periods of negative
energy prices – where clean energy
generators must pay to dispatch their
electricity output. To avoid dispatching
at low or negative prices, in periods
of sunny but mild weather it is not
uncommon for more than 20% of
the entire system output (most of
the solar and wind generation) to
be curtailed.39,40 Curtailment is any
action that reduces the amount of
electricity generated to maintain the
balance between supply and demand,
which is critical to avoid blackouts.
These challenges indicate that
enhanced demand flexibility is
essential to transition to high levels of
renewables at a reasonable cost and
to fill the growing load balancing gap.
For this to happen, demand flexibility,
or the use of communication and
control technologies to shift electricity
use throughout the day, must
evolve into a reliable resource that is
incorporated into energy procurement
and forecasting processes.
Historically, the focus of balancing
supply and demand has been
predominantly on ensuring that
variable demand is met with available
supply. However, as variable renewable
energy enters the system, it becomes

necessary to consider compensating
for variable supply. The management
of variability on the supply side is
broadly referred to as ‘firming’. While
firming is a concept that is relatively
new to the Australian power system,
the underlying principle of responding
to supply-demand imbalance is
core to the operation of any secure
and reliable electricity system.
To maintain stability in a system
with significant variable renewable
energy, demand-side options are
required that can start, stop and
change – quickly, reliably and ondemand (dispatchable); and sustain
capacity over a required period.
The best way to leverage the
affordability of clean power is to
‘balance the load’ through firming.
Firming refers to maintaining the
output from an intermittent power
source for a required length of time;
in other words, making sure enough
energy is always available. Essentially,
firming of renewables involves storing
excess electricity when low carbon
electricity generation exceeds the
demand, and then releasing it when
the demand exceeds the supply. The
aim is to create a permanent supply of
low carbon power and—by extension—
low power prices, without volatility.

NSW Peak Demand Reduction Scheme (PDRS)
In 2022, the NSW Government launched the PDRS to encourage the
deployment of peak demand reduction technologies. The scheme creates
a competitive market and incentives to deliver cost-effective peak demand
reduction. Households and businesses choosing to install technologies
that reduce electricity demand during peak times can receive a discount or
other financial incentive.
Reducing peak demand on an industrial scale places downward pressure
on wholesale electricity prices and will support electricity system reliability
in NSW. For more information, visit energy.nsw.gov.au.

Grid-interactive efficient buildings discussion paper v.1

23

Grid-interactive efficient buildings discussion paper v.1

24

Addressing the
opportunity

Energy efficiency is a focus of most
property owners’ and operators’ net
zero carbon plans. For most, this
simply means ‘use less energy’.
However, if buildings were to interact
with electricity grids intelligently
and dynamically, then they could
support much higher penetration of
renewables and reduce the entire
energy system’s dependence on
fossil fuels. This could be done by
using more electricity, while emitting
less carbon at a reduced cost.
The market price and carbon intensity
of electricity varies in proportion to
the amount of renewable energy in
the supply mix. When the proportion
of renewables goes up, greenhouse

FIGURE 8

gas emissions (CO2-eq) per unit of
energy go down. On the flipside,
electricity generated from fossil
fuels contributes more emissions.

Carbon intensity of the electricity grid in New South Wales

This can be easily observed in Figure
7 which shows the carbon intensity of
the electricity grid in South Australia
for a five-day period (blue) overlayed
with the National Greenhouse Account
(NGA) carbon intensity factor (green).
The emissions from one kilowatt-hour
of electricity vary from almost zero to
more than 600 grams/kWh. whereas
the NGA factor takes an annual
straight-line approach which glazes
over the opportunities and costs of
using electricity from the grid when
more renewable power is available.

FIGURE 9

Carbon intensity of the electricity grid in Queensland

FIGURE 7

Carbon intensity of the electricity grid in South Australia
Similar variability can be seen in New South Wales, Queensland and Victoria.

FIGURE 10

Carbon intensity of the electricity grid in Victoria

Grid-interactive efficient buildings discussion paper v.1



25

Grid-interactive efficient buildings discussion paper v.1



26

Forecasting the carbon intensity of
electricity supplies is complex, yet
crucial for informing actions aimed at
driving down emissions. In the above
examples, the variability is explained
by the combination of demand on the
system and the contributions of wind
and solar power.

If a 24-hour forecast for a building’s
electricity demand is overlaid
(illustrated by the blue shaded area in
Figure 11) over the carbon intensity
of the grid for the same period (red
line), one can see that the carbon
intensity profile is very different to
the energy consumption profile.

FIGURE 11

Carbon intensity of the grid compared to building energy consumption for a
building in South Australia

41. Greenhouse Gas Protocol, Scope 2
Guidance – background memo and
list of questions. Accessed
April 2023

What is EnergyTag?
The EnergyTag Initiative is a global non-profit, industry-led effort to create
a market for Granular Certificates that allows energy users to verify the
source of their electricity and carbon emissions in real-time. It is supported
by companies such as Google, Microsoft, Mitsubishi and Vattenfall.
By adopting an hourly accounting period for certificates, consumers can
understand where and when their energy is coming from and what their
carbon emissions are at any given moment, which builds trust, supports
storage and flexibility, enables accurate carbon accounting, and supports
new market models. The goal of the EnergyTag Initiative is to establish
Granular Certificates as a common, tradable instrument that provides
traceability across markets for power, flexibility, and carbon.

Updates to the Greenhouse Gas Emissions Protocol
Scope 2 reporting method
In 2022, the Greenhouse Gas Protocol started a process to collect
stakeholder input to understand whether guidance to Scope 2 emissions
reporting from the location and market-based methods were needed. This
is the first review of the standard since September 2015, highlighting how
much this space has evolved.

The above graph shows that, from
a carbon perspective, reducing
consumption in the middle of the
day does not make sense. It makes
sense at this time to use low, or zero
carbon energy being generated to
provide more comfort to occupants.
To take advantage of the lower
emissions profile from the grid,
Building managers must be able
to shift their demand in real time
through smart energy management.
National greenhouse gas accounting
standards do not account for this
variability – they have been designed
to create an average of the year, for
the purposes of annual emissions
reporting. There is also a lack of
real-time information available to
building managers – which limits
their ability to manage their energy
and therefore carbon in real time.

In the graph above, active efficiency
strategies could reduce greenhouse
gas emissions by trimming loads at
the beginning and/or end of the day
and potentially increasing loads in
the middle, for example by increasing
the building’s indoor air quality or
thermal comfort using solar power
distributed through the grid. Active
efficiency is a very new concept,
which may seem daunting. Active
efficiency strategies are cost cutting
strategies. They are price-aware, they
drive smarter investment, enable
higher penetration of renewable
generation sources, and are arguably
the most important contribution that
buildings, in addition to electrification,
can make to a zero carbon future.

Grid-interactive efficient buildings discussion paper v.1



27

For Scope 2 emissions, which are emissions from the electricity grid,
the questions relate to the reporting of an immediate GHG emission
reduction without needing to demonstrate a corresponding immediate and
equivalent reduction in emissions to the atmosphere. At this point in time,
the protocol requires all reporting on a net basis – that is, averaged over
a year. However, questions in the protocol indicate that there will likely be
updates to better reflect time of use,41 amongst other issues.

Grid-interactive efficient buildings discussion paper v.1



28

The built
environment’s
role in the
transition
42. ASBEC, Unlocking the pathway:
Why electrification is the key to net
zero buildings. Accessed April 2023

Despite being responsible for a
significant portion of global energy
consumption and greenhouse
gas emissions, buildings are
often not considered part of the
electricity system or market. As
a result, building operators are
insulated from price changes and
are often unaware of their energy
consumption’s implications.
This lack of engagement with
electricity networks hinders the
decarbonisation of electricity grids and
could slow the transition to achieving
net-zero emissions by 2050. This
is supported by ASBECs ‘Unlocking
the pathway: Why electrification is
the key to net zero buildings’42 report
which notes that it will be impossible
to achieve a net zero goal without
the built environment electrifying and
being part of the energy transition.

Internationally, the IEA also agrees,
with their zero-carbon-ready definition
explicitly highlighting the need for
buildings to be able to integrate
to the wider energy system.
To support the growth of renewable
energy investment, improve network
reliability, and drive down the cost
of energy, buildings must actively
engage with electricity networks
and consider the real-time carbon
intensity of their consumption and
demand pressures on electricity
markets. By doing so, buildings can
play a vital role in accelerating the
transition to a cleaner energy future.
There are four ways that the built
environment can be part of the
solution to the grid’s transition.

Efficient

Electrified

Minimising energy consumption
reduces the demand placed on grid
resources and infrastructure.

Uses renewable electricity for all its
power needs, removing the need for
any fossil fuel use in the building.

Smart

Flexible

Efficiency, flexibility, and occupant
outcomes can be co-optimised
using analytics that are backed
by sensors and controls.

Energy consumption can be
decreased, rescheduled, or modified
by utilising distributed generation,
storage, and dynamic loads.



43. ACEEE, State of the Market: GridInteractive Efficient Building Utility
Programs. Accessed April 2023

A grid-interactive efficient building
(GEB) is a fully-electric building
capable of providing energy-efficient
building services and dynamic
grid services through connected,
smart control of multiple flexible
building loads and DERs.
As outlined by the American Council
for an Energy-Efficient Economy
(ACEEE), GEBs can be viewed
from two perspectives: that of the
individual building system, and that
of the building as part of the grid
system.43 From a building systems
perspective, GEBs are first and
foremost energy efficient and fully
electric. They are well insulated,
have energy-efficient windows, and
use highly efficient mechanical and
lighting systems. They also use
electricity for all their energy needs.
GEBs leverage advanced technology
like smart equipment, sensors, and
controls to optimise energy use
based on occupancy, weather, and a
whole range of other factors. In the
commercial sector, these controls
go a step further, to encompass
an energy management and
information system (EMIS), building
management and control systems
(BMCS), submeters, advanced power
boards, electronic window solar
film, and smart lighting controls.
GEBs differ from efficient smart
buildings in a key way: their ability to
connect and interact with the local
grid system. The two-way flow of
information between the grid and a
GEB enables the building to act as a
flexible resource for grid managers.
For instance, the building can draw
on energy storage when the grid is
at peak use, thereby shifting its load.
It can also reduce load during peak
times, such as through lighting control

These four elements, when combined create a zero-carbon all-electric gridinteractive efficient building.

Grid-interactive efficient buildings discussion paper v.1

What is a grid-interactive
efficient building?

29

or reducing HVAC energy consumption
during peak times. Grid-interactive
efficient buildings can respond to
time-dependent grid needs, making
them a part of the evolving electricity
grid. The ability to communicate
with the grid in real-time allows for
smarter energy consumption and
reduced carbon footprint. Figure
12 shows the elements commonly
found in a commercial GEB.
Grid-interactive efficient buildings
support advanced monitoring
and control for buildings and
community energy systems.
They are characterised by several
capabilities, such as co-optimising
multiple end-uses (lighting, HVAC)
and DERs, including generation and
storage. They optimise operations
over a time window and incorporate
predictions about relevant inputs
into the optimisation. This capability
allows buildings to leverage storage
and other sources of scheduling
flexibility to shape energy use over
multiple time scales to respond
to grid needs while minimising
negative impacts on occupants. Gridinteractive efficient buildings can help
ensure that they are part of the 24/7
renewable energy transformation.
One of the most significant benefits
of grid-interactive efficient buildings
GEBs is their flexibility in providing
dynamic load control to support the
electricity grid. They can shed, shift,
and modulate loads, which provide
ancillary services such as frequency
regulation and voltage control. In
general, fast responding controls,
communications, and loads can
provide a broader set of grid services.

Grid-interactive efficient buildings discussion paper v.1



30

Potential benefits

FIGURE 12

Buildings as batteries

Grid-interactive efficient buildings can increase grid stability, resilience,
and efficiency, to ultimately reduce the need for fossil fuel use and
greenhouse gas emissions. They can shift demand to times when
ample cleaner, more affordable power is available, providing a much
more balanced load demand and lowering costs for consumers.

(Source: https://www.aceee.org/sites/default/files/pdfs/Grid-interactive efficient
buildings-103019.pdf)

Grid-interactive efficient buildings

Energy and cost savings

45. ACEEE, Grid-Interactive Efficient
Building Utility Programs: State of
the Market. Accessed April 2023
46. ACEEE, State of the Market: GridInteractive Efficient Building Utility
Programs. Accessed April 2023

Built environment/
Building Owners/
Operators

Infrastructure/Utilities/
Retailers

Cost savings/
Revenue source

Greater service
offering, creating
a future focused
business model

Grid-interactive technologies offer energy savings and greater system
control through smart energy management. Smart control devices and
Reduced ‘bill shock’
sensors can identify energy-saving opportunities in large commercial
45
buildings. Grid-interactive efficient buildings participating in demandresponse programs can receive compensation for reducing or shifting Accelerated
decarbonisation
energy consumption during events. In service territories with time
varying rates, customers can shift demand to low-cost periods to
reduce costs. Australia’s 5MS introduced in October 2021 provides
opportunities for buildings to participate in the market through
demand-response, potentially resulting in small windfalls for building
operators.

Grid stability and efficiency

44. IEA, Net Zero by 2050: A Roadmap
for the Global Energy Sector, IEA,
2021. Accessed April 2023

According to the IEA,44 zero-carbon-ready buildings are buildings that can
achieve net-zero carbon emissions over their lifetime without requiring
major retrofits or changes in occupant behaviour. To be zero-carbon-ready,
buildings need to meet three criteria:
T
 hey must be highly energy-efficient, minimising the energy demand
for heating, cooling, lighting and appliances

Load flexibility and demand response
Grid-interactive efficient buildings provide flexible demand to the grid,
allowing it to manage the energy supply more efficiently. While energy
efficiency programs, DERs and VPPs can offset energy demand,
they can also make the grid less stable and flexible. Grid-interactive
technologies can shift energy demand to help manage supply peaks,
providing a more consistent supply of energy to the grid. This is
important because variable power sources like solar and wind can
require other types of power supply or storage to meet peak loads.

T
 hey must use low-carbon energy sources, such as renewable
electricity, solar thermal, to meet their remaining energy needs
T
 hey must be flexible and smart, enabling demand response and
integration with the wider energy system.
Zero-carbon-ready buildings are essential for achieving the IEA’s netzero emissions scenario by 2050, which requires all new buildings to be
zero-carbon-ready by 2030 and all existing buildings to be retrofitted by
2050. Zero-carbon-ready buildings can also provide multiple benefits
for occupants, owners and society, such as improved comfort, health,
productivity, resilience and affordability.

Grid-interactive efficient buildings discussion paper v.1



Improved operational Clearer model to
outcomes
operate and manage

Grid-interactive buildings can increase grid reliability, efficiency and
stability by smoothing out both supply and demand peaks. For example,
coupling building systems with demand and emissions forecasting can Greater predictability
be used to enhance ventilation and pre-cool spaces during times of peak of demand and
supply
energy supply, and reduce loads during peak demand. Relieving strain
on the grid reduces the likelihood of power outages and brownouts,
improves power quality and grid reliability, and can moderate WEMs
by avoiding the high price spikes that can occur during peak demand
periods. Reducing congestion can provide other benefits such as
distribution voltage support and grid frequency regulation.

IEA’s Zero-Carbon-Ready Buildings definition

Reduction of greenhouse gas emissions

31

Grid-interactive efficient buildings reduce greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions by using less energy and reducing reliance on carbon-intensive
energy supply to balance variable renewables. Investing in demand
flexibility, rather than relying on natural gas generation, can produce
20% fewer CO2 emissions per year.46 Reducing peak electricity demand
can also reduce emissions by avoiding inefficient sources of generation. Efficient and smart buildings lead to less energy generation and
fewer GHG emissions.

Improved relationships
with customers

Shifts from a being
just a retailer toward
product-as-a-service
model

Lower cost of
electricity at peak
times

More efficient
operating system, less
risk of load shedding,
blackouts etc.

Accelerated
decarbonisation,
reporting to
investors

Improved outcomes for
investors
Business model stays
relevant

47. New Buildings Institute, GridOptimal
Metrics Offer Guidance on
Optimizing Building-Grid Interaction.
Accessed April 2023
48. USGBC, GridOptimal Building ACP.
Accessed April 2023

GridOptimal Buildings Initiative47
The GridOptimal Buildings Initiative is an effort by the New Buildings
Institute (NBI), in partnership with the U.S. Green Building Council,
to promote the adoption of grid-interactive efficient buildings. The
GridOptimal Buildings Initiative provides technical assistance, training,
and resources to building owners, developers, and designers to help them
integrate GEB strategies into their building designs and operations. The
initiative also works with utilities, policymakers, and other stakeholders to
promote policies and programs that support the deployment of GEBs and
their integration into the grid.
The initiative developed new metrics by which building features and
operating characteristics that support more effective grid operation can
be measured and quantified. There are currently eight core GridOptimal
metrics that are scored on a scale of 0-100%. These combine two basic
approaches to evaluate the quality of building-grid interactions: (1) building
energy consumption patterns (load shape or demand profile), and (2)
building assets (capabilities). In May 2021, they also delivered a LEED Pilot
Credit,48 to encourage refining these metrics.

Grid-interactive efficient buildings discussion paper v.1



33

Grid-interactive efficient buildings discussion paper v.1



34

Challenges and
opportunities
Participants in the three workshops
were asked to note challenges that
needed to be overcome to achieve
their desired scenario, and the
opportunities that presented if their
scenario became true. A review of
the feedback showed all scenarios
shared similar challenges and
opportunities.

Challenges

Opportunities

When asked, correspondents noted significant challenges to being
successful in any of the scenarios above. In particular, the following six
challenges were highlighted:

When asked, correspondents noted significant opportunities
that would be available in any of the scenarios above. In
particular, the following six opportunities were highlighted:

 Infrastructure constraints: The need to upgrade and/or retrofit
existing infrastructure, such as electrical systems and the grid, as
well as existing buildings is a common challenge mentioned in all
three scenarios.

D
 ecentralised generation: The use of decentralised generation,
such as on-site solar and battery systems, is mentioned in all
three scenarios as a means of avoiding the need for expensive
infrastructure investments and improving grid stability.

 Regulatory challenges: The pace of regulatory change and the
need to regulate various aspects of energy systems and
infrastructure was noted. It was noted the grid was decarbonising
significantly quicker than expected, and policies and plans had not
adjusted to suit.

D
 emand response and real-time carbon tracking: The
use of demand response initiatives and real-time carbon
tracking that would be needed in all scenarios would provide
an opportunity to further reduce emissions, particularly
as the grid arrives to near-100% renewable state.

 Demand response: Introducing and further cementing demand
response initiatives in construction and building operations was
noted repeatedly. A key challenge was identifying the level of action
and infrastructure needed at a building, precinct, or grid level – with
opinions split between all three scenarios.

C
 ollaboration and cross-industry engagement: The
need for collaboration and engagement across various
sectors and industries is mentioned in all three scenarios
as a means of scaling solutions and driving change.
Electrification and the rise of energy storage: The
electrification of buildings and the rise of localised storage
and electric vehicles is mentioned as a potential opportunity.
It was noted that smart electrification was fundamental
to ensuring buildings could respond in real time.

 Cultural challenges: The need to overcome cultural challenges,
such as the difficulty in winning over building owners and
operators, is mentioned in all three scenarios. It became clear
throughout the consultation process that there were multiple
expectations of what needed to be done, but differing opinions
about where responsibility lies. This was also the case due to the
problems with the cost of deploying any solution.

E
 fficiency and cost reduction: Continued focus on driving down
energy consumption, and peak consumption was seen as a
great opportunity to drive down energy costs. In particular, the
link between peak demand management and energy efficient
buildings, and the need to reduce infrastructure investment was
seen as a powerful opportunity that was yet to be explored fully.

 Data access and integration: The need for better structured and
cloud-connected building data and the integration of context data
and grid signals was repeatedly mentioned. Participants noted that
while information was available, it was difficult to parse, or wasn’t
linked to performance data in any meaningful way.

M
 arket dynamics and pricing: The use of market
dynamics and pricing to drive behaviour change would
drive new potential revenue opportunities that would make
investing in transforming existing buildings possible.

 Fair cost of power: Ensuring that the cost of power is fair and that
the grid is paid fairly for its services was also repeatedly mentioned.
In addition to the above, there were items that were common amongst
scenarios, but mentioned less frequently. These are:

 re there any opportunities that result from the integration
A
of the built environment and the grid?

 Aging buildings and lack of space for storage and large electrical
infrastructure. Older buildings not designed with local solar and
battery in mind
Challenge of retrofitting smart grid-interactive metering
B
 uilding codes not adequately dealing with the issue of peak
demand, energy storage, or electric vehicles in buildings
B
 uildings optimising on-site generation for themselves
rather than overall emissions or grid services.

Are there any other challenges that we should consider?

Grid-interactive efficient buildings discussion paper v.1



35

Grid-interactive efficient buildings discussion paper v.1



36

Case Studies

C
A
S
E
S
T
U
D
Y

University of Technology Sydney:
Dr Chau Chak Wing Building

University of Technology Sydney:
Dr Chau Chak Wing Building

Grosvenor Place

Location
Sydney, NSW
Sector
Education

EG Funds Management

Network capacity charges in the
Sydney CBD and surrounding suburbs
are based on a building’s maximum
half-hourly demand during the
weekday hours 2.00pm – 8.00pm,
and are set on a rolling twelve-month
basis. To avoid a forecast ‘reset’ on
17 January 2022, at 8:00am the

global temperature setpoint in the
Frank Gehry-designed business
school building was changed from
the normal summer setpoint (23.0°C)
to 22.0°C. It was then raised to
24.5°C at 1:45pm. The setpoint
was returned to the normal 23.0°C
setting at the end of the day.

Sydney Opera House

F
 orecast GHG emissions: 6,370 kg CO2-eq (grid)
Demand reduction: 175 kW
M
 easured GHG emissions: 5,350 kg CO2-eq (grid)
GHG saving: 16%

Grid-interactive efficient buildings discussion paper v.1



37

Grid-interactive efficient buildings discussion paper v.1



38

Grosvenor Place
C
A
S
E
S
T
U
D
Y

Grosvenor Place’s all-electric HVAC
system includes a large thermal
storage plant (ice and hot water)
which facilitates the shifting of
electrical loads from peak to offpeak. Until recently, the electricity
grid needed more demand at night.
But with demand increasing during
daylight hours, this has created an
opportunity for Grosvenor Place to
adjust the operating strategy, as
illustrated below.
On Sunday 17 July 2022, building
management scheduled chillers to
run as heat pumps from 10:30am to
3.00pm, generating hot water to help
with the usual warm up on Monday

morning. This demand is illustrated in
the first plot, showing GHG emissions
from electricity used throughout the
day. Theoretically, using the official
NSW emissions factor published
by the Australian Government for
reporting purposes (0.79 kg/kWh),
the building contributed 24,013kg of
CO2-eq emissions to the atmosphere
during that 4.5-hour window (the
green line). However, by taking into
account the carbon emissions
occurring in real-time from all the
generators feeding the local electricity
grid during the period, 15,790kg of
CO2-eq emissions were measured:
8,223kg (34.2%) less.

C
A
S
E
S
T
U
D
Y

Location
National
Sector
Commercial

EG Funds Management
EG is proud to operate at the
intersection of property, technology,
and carbon. That’s why EG has
committed to achieving ‘Real Zero’
carbon by 2030, going beyond net zero.
Grid interactivity is central to the target
which takes a sophisticated, datadriven approach to reducing emissions.
The Government’s NGA Factors for
scope 2 emissions are merely an
annual average of emissions intensity,
one data point which assumes that
every kWh of electricity consumed has
the same carbon intensity. Given the
pace at which different forms of energy
– both renewable and non-renewable
– enter and exit the grid, we know that
this is simply not the case. Real Zero
takes a far more granular approach to
carbon accounting.
Considering the live carbon intensity
of the grid every 15 minutes, as
opposed to once annually, allows EG to
operate with over 35,000 data points

Location
Sydney, NSW
Sector
Commercial office

The saving occurred because 17 July
was a sunny day, which generated
a significant volume of solar power
relative to demand, reducing the need
for coal-fired generators. In fact, for
much of the period when the chillers
were in operation, the wholesale
price of electricity in NSW was zero
or negative, reducing the need for
fossil-fuelled generators even further.

when seeking emissions reduction
activities. One way to efficiently reduce
carbon emissions is to identify the
most carbon intensive energy our
buildings are using. Reducing that
use, rather than the energy used
from solar generated on site or when
there is high solar penetration in the
grid, is an effective, cheaper way to
achieve emissions reductions.
Analysing a breadth of additional
data points allows new emissions
reduction tactics, such as demand
management, load shifting and 24/7
renewable energy procurement, to be
deployed. This approach allows EG
to go beyond net zero targets, now
ubiquitous across the sector, seizing
opportunities for tangible emissions
reductions rather than depending
on purchasing carbon offsets and
renewable energy certificates.
Find out more about EG’s Real
Zero target at eg.com.au/esg

If the team opted to make the same
quantity of hot water on Monday
morning before 7.00am (rather than
leveraging the solar power in the
middle of the day on the Sunday),
GHG emissions would have been
5,487kg higher. So, even making some
allowance for a small amount of heat
loss overnight, the strategy delivered
a reduction of 5 tonnes CO2-eq of
greenhouse gases in the atmosphere.

Grid-interactive efficient buildings discussion paper v.1



39

Grid-interactive efficient buildings discussion paper v.1



40

C
A
S
E

Between 12–3pm the building
achieved close to 500 kWh load
reduction on the Chiller plant
and AHU meters compared to a
directly comparable day (9 October
2022, also a Sunday), without
conditions in the venue areas
falling outside normal limits.

S
T
U
D
Y

While the experiment was a clear
success and paves the way for
ongoing deployment of load flex
strategies, there were no emissions
savings because favourable weather
meant there was enough renewable
generation to cover the entire
building demand until 3pm (the test
was scheduled days in advance).
This outcome highlights the scale
of the opportunity and the value of
automating the relationship between
the forecast signal and the response.

Location
Sydney, NSW

Sydney Opera House

Sector
Performing Arts

The Sydney Opera House has an
innovative power purchase agreement
(PPA) that ties its electricity demand
to the output of solar and wind farms
in regional NSW. In 2022, the City of
Sydney awarded the Opera House
an Environmental Performance
Innovation Grant to further explore
ways to match its demand more
closely to renewable energy
production, utilising fine-grained
forecasts of both demand and supply.
On Sunday 7 May 2023, renewable
energy generation was forecast to
be plentiful in the morning before

dropping off in the early afternoon.
Drawing on a five-day-ahead forecast,
management programmed the
building automation system (BAS)
to pre-cool and dehumidify three
venues (Joan Sutherland Theatre,
Studio and Drama Theatre) in the 90
minutes preceding the renewables
generation drop-off point (10:30am
–12pm) and then shed load by
allowing conditions to gradually return
to normal setpoints when renewables
were forecasted to drop (12-3pm).
At 3pm all overridden control points
were released back to auto.

Grid-interactive efficient buildings discussion paper v.1



41

Grid-interactive efficient buildings discussion paper v.1



42

Unlocking the
potential of
grid-interactive
efficient buildings

There are a variety of reasons why building owners and operators
do not currently flex their load to support network capacity and
stability. To be successful, any GEB program will need to offer
rewards for participation that exceed the costs (perceived and real).

Future role (by 2035)
Build and own
buildings
Have strategies for
managing energy
use alongside the
network
Implement
strategies in
the portfolio
to create new
revenue streams
from managing
loads and selling
capacity back to
the network.

Stakeholders
These are the critical stakeholders that are part of this transition.

Real estate
executives, fund
managers

Developers, Building
Owners & Investors

Facility Managers,
Asset & Portfolio
managers,
Professional
Services, Technical
service providers /
contractors

Utilities, energy
retailers

Government,
regulators, policy
makers

 uild, own, and
B
manage ‘in front
of the meter’
infrastructure,
e.g., utility scale
generation,
transmission,
distribution and
metering assets

 rovide regulatory
P
frameworks,
incentives and
obligations to
ensure the energy
system meets
community
expectations for
secure, reliable
and affordable
electricity supply

Build and own
the ‘behind the
meter’ segment
of the Australian
electricity system
– DER – which
account for
approx. 50% of
all active system
infrastructure.

Design, operate
and actively
manage ‘behind
the meter’
infrastructure as
DERs, including
energy-using
equipment, submetering, fabric
and facades,
distributed
generation,
distributed
storage, control
systems

Build, own and
manage ‘in front
of the meter’
segment of
the Australian
electricity system
which accounts
for ap <?xml
version=”1.0”

A
 s previous page.

Procure electricity
and actively
manage demand
and supply
according to its
real-time price and
carbon content
to minimise cost
and environmental
impact.

Current role
 uild and own
B
buildings
 se electricity
U
as required
without regard
for the network or
wholesale market
 eport on carbon
R
emissions on a net
basis.

 uild and own
B
buildings’ ‘behind
the meter’
infrastructure,
e.g., energyusing equipment,
cabling, submetering,
distributed
generation,
distributed
storage, control
systems
 se electricity
U
as required
without regard
for the network or
wholesale market.

 esign and
D
operate ‘behind
the meter’
infrastructure
 rocure electricity
P
via retailers
Influence
electricity use
without regard
for the network or
wholesale market.

 alance and
B
control the grid
through market
participation and
operations
 nsure secure,
E
reliable and
affordable
electricity supply
for consumers.

 evelop strategies,
D
implement
plans, and
monitor progress
towards meeting
commitments
made under the
UNFCCC’s Paris
Agreement.

Grid-interactive efficient buildings discussion paper v.1



43

From challenge to
opportunity

Governance
Challenge: Federal and state governments, policymakers, and
regulators play a vital role in supporting, and facilitating and
incentivising demand flexibility, but there is a lack of consistent
standards and regulations and supportive policies and programs.
Opportunity: State programs like NSW’s Peak Demand Reduction
Scheme and QLD’s Peaksmart promote demand response opportunities.
Green Star introduced a ‘Grid Resilience’ credit to advance the
discussion, while NABERS is partnering with the GBCA to explore ways
to support 24/7 renewable energy. Amendments to the NCC could
help foster grid-interactive solutions in the built environment.

Industry awareness
Challenge: GEBs are not considered ’business-as-usual’,
and there is limited industry awareness and negative
perception about how difficult they are to deliver.
Opportunity: Industry associations and key innovators are mainstreaming
the idea of buildings as solutions. Electrifying buildings offers
opportunities to implement smart systems and relevant upgrades.

Grid-interactive efficient buildings discussion paper v.1



44

49. CSIRO & DeltaQ, Digital Innovation
Opportunity for Energy Productivity
in Non-Residential Buildings.
Accessed April 2023

Technical feasibility

Cost and complexity

Challenge: GEBs require expertise, client demand, and technical know-how,
but the building and construction industry lacks familiarity with grid-interactive
technologies and design tools.

Challenge: Consumers are hesitant to adopt grid-interactive efficient building
technologies due to high upfront costs and complexity. Demand flexibility
functionality can add complexity to technology operation and present an
additional barrier, particularly in commercial buildings where demand response
capability comes from non-automated (i.e. manual) peak load reductions.

Opportunity: Governments and industry stakeholders can promote education
and training programs focused on grid-interactive technologies and design
tools, increasing familiarity and expertise within the building and construction
industry. This will encourage adoption and help create client demand for GEBs.

Technology maturity
Challenge: Some grid-interactive efficient building technologies are rapidly
changing, introducing a potential risk of technological obsolescence to early
adopters, which can limit their deployment.
Opportunity: Governments and market players can collaborate to establish
incentives, such as tax breaks or grants, for early adopters of emerging
technologies. This can help mitigate the risk of obsolescence, encourage
adoption, and accelerate the deployment of GEBs.

Opportunity: Governments and industry stakeholders can provide
financial incentives, such as rebates or low-interest loans, to offset high
upfront costs and promote the adoption of grid-interactive technologies.
Additionally, they can invest in research and development to simplify
demand flexibility functionality and improve user interfaces, making
the technologies more accessible and appealing to a broader range of
consumers, including commercial building owners. Artificial intelligence
solutions will also reduce the complexity by being able to manage large
amount of data and take predictive actions based on network conditions.

Lack of understanding or incentives

Connectivity and interoperability
Challenge: Reliable, cyber-secure connectivity and interoperability are crucial
for ensuring adoption at scale, but seamless connectivity is not yet widespread,
resulting in expensive integration efforts.
Opportunity: Governments and industry stakeholders can collaborate to develop
and implement standardised, secure protocols and frameworks that promote
seamless connectivity and interoperability. By doing so, they can reduce
integration costs, enhance cyber-security, and foster the widespread adoption of
GEBs.

Challenge: Generally, owners and operators of large non-residential buildings
do not prioritise energy management, and the same is true for residential
customers. Any grid-interactive efficient building program will need to engage
and motivate building owners and operators by offering tangible benefits.
Opportunity: Governments and industry stakeholders can develop and promote
awareness campaigns showcasing the economic and environmental benefits of
grid-interactive efficient building technologies. By highlighting cost savings and
revenue generating opportunities as well as move accurate and reduced carbon
emissions, these campaigns can engage and motivate building owners and
operators to prioritise energy management and adopt grid-interactive solutions

Utility trust and incentives

Digital Innovation Opportunity for Energy Productivity in Non-Residential Buildings49
Published by CSIRO in 2023,
the report discusses digital
technologies and systems,
digitalisation applications for energy
productivity, costs, examples of
Australian companies, barriers
and drivers for increased adoption,
recent unpublished surveys
and focus group, standards and
certification review, national benefit
potential, pilot narratives, synthesis,
and recommendations:

.

 eveloping a national
D
digitalisation program that
includes a range of initiatives
such as pilot programs, research
and development, and industry
engagement
 stablishing a Smart Building
E
Digital Technology Accelerator
pilot program that focuses on
developing digital technologies
that can improve energy
productivity in non-residential
buildings

 ncouraging industry
E
collaboration to develop new
digital technologies that can
improve energy productivity in
non-residential buildings.
According to the report, the national
benefit potential of digital innovation
in non-residential buildings is
significant. The report suggests that
digitalisation can lead to a 5-10%
reduction in energy consumption,
which translates to a potential
saving of $1.3 billion per year.

Grid-interactive efficient buildings discussion paper v.1



45

Challenge: Utilities and power grid operators may not trust
demand flexibility performance and do not have sufficient financial
incentives to pursue energy efficiency and demand flexibility.
Opportunity: Governments and regulatory bodies can re-evaluate and adjust
existing regulatory frameworks to incentivise utilities and power grid operators to
invest in energy efficiency and demand flexibility. This can include performancebased incentives, development of pilots, and establishing demand response
markets. These actions will help foster greater trust and collaboration between
utilities, grid operators, and grid-interactive efficient building stakeholders.

Grid-interactive efficient buildings discussion paper v.1



46

50. Energy Efficiency Council, Clean
Energy, Clean Demand. Accessed
April 2023

Financial payback

What would industry like to see from all stakeholders?

Challenge: While grid-interactive efficient building and zero-carbon-ready
buildings have a higher upfront cost than other green and non-green buildings,
investor and owner returns on investment can differ greatly depending on
the market in which the building is built, taking into account energy costs,
incentive programs, and climate policies such as a tax on carbon.

When asked, correspondents noted there were several actions that they would want to see from all stakeholders
to ensure success. Similarly, stakeholders were asked to do this with their chosen scenario – however, analysis
showed that while the amount that needed to be done differed between scenarios, the broad levers were similar:

Opportunity: Governments and industry stakeholders can work together to
establish comprehensive, region-specific incentive programs and supportive
policies that account for local energy costs and climate goals. By doing so,
they can help level the playing field for grid-interactive and zero-carbon-ready
buildings, making them more attractive investments and facilitating broader
market adoption. These changes can also drive investment in GEBs by turning
them into revenue-generating assets, rather than just consumers of energy.

Renewable energy
and storage

A
 ccelerate the move to 100% renewable energy and increase renewable generation,
grid storage, and stability infrastructure
M
 ake EVs and battery storage cheaper and increase the use of hydrogen storage.

Carbon pricing and
energy efficiency

Implement a carbon pricing mechanism and add carbon pricing to existing white
certificate schemes
S
 hift the focus from energy efficiency to carbon efficiency, calculated in real time,
and implement carbon accounting standards that recognise demand flexibility
P
 romote real-time carbon accounting and increase disclosure across all building
types.

Grid participation
and market design

Clean Energy, Clean demand

50

Published by the Energy Efficiency Council in 2023, The report “Clean
Energy, Clean Demand” covers a wide range of issues related to energy
management, renewables and electrification. It acknowledges the dramatic
changes in the energy sector in the past decade and how low-cost
renewable energy and electrification impact energy efficiency.
The report notes the following findings:

P
 rovide practical guidance and technology support to users at different scales to
assist with the transition to a more sustainable energy system
Establish a clear connection between energy markets and demand signals and
provide incentives for GEBs
P
 romote community grid participation and reimagine the full value stack to allow
deferred network investment to flow through to end users
Implement simple market design with clear market signals and update current rules
around embedded networks and microgrids to allow flexibility

M
 anaging demand and supply is critical for a fast, reliable, and
affordable energy transition.

E
 ncourage leadership and bravery in government to try new approaches and provide
a roadmap for the grid

E
 lectrifying efficiently will support the rapid, affordable decarbonisation
of electricity.

Foster a shift in people’s relationship with energy and make the transition to a more
sustainable energy system intuitive and easy for everyone.

D
 riving down the total cost of our energy systems will reduce bills for
consumers.

There were other items that were discussed, including,

T
 ransforming energy demand requires urgent focus.
Two recommendations are directly related to the question of GEBs. In
particular, the report notes the challenges of modelling and optimising
demand- and supply-side measures and recommends building capacity to
be able to do this. The report also notes the need to integrate demand-side
solutions from buildings and appliances.

 The need for technologies to enable buildings to interact with the grid in both directions
T
 he importance of mandatory disclosure, policies regarding energy management systems and vehicle-to-grid
integration, and the requirement for developments to contribute to new renewable and storage infrastructure
T
 he need for actual disclosure of the source of electricity used, behind-the-meter net energy metering
equivalent systems, and clear market signals
T
 he need for greater flexibility in accessing and using the network to distribute power, incentives for GEBs, and
a shift in focus from efficiency to demand management.

Is there any other policy or private solution that you would like to see?

Grid-interactive efficient buildings discussion paper v.1



47

Grid-interactive efficient buildings discussion paper v.1



48

Roadmap

Medium-term actions (5-10 years)
Monitor and report GHG
emissions based on
hourly intensity data

Developers, Building
Owners & Investors

Facility Managers, Asset
& Portfolio managers,
Professional Services,
Technical service providers
/ contractors

Utilities, energy retailers

Deploy DER investments
to actively manage load
in real-time to minimise
carbon emissions

Government, regulators,
policy makers

Leaders will achieve
24/7 renewable energy
operations within this
timeframe.

Short-term actions (2-3 years)
 ngage with training and
E
awareness programs
addressing real-time
carbon accounting and
management

 ngage with training and
E
awareness programs
addressing real-time
carbon accounting and
management

 evelop strategies and
D
begin implementing
plans to harness ‘behind
the meter’ infrastructure
for real-time carbon and
cost savings

 eek opportunities to
S
achieve commercial
outcomes from
implementing realtime carbon and cost
management

 ommence reporting
C
GHG emissions based
on real-time carbon
intensity of electricity
supplies, in addition
to average annual
emissions factors

 ngage with retailers
E
to procure electricity
with incentives for realtime carbon and cost
management.

 ommit to ‘zero carbon’
C
goals, i.e. beyond ‘net
zero’.

Introduce attractive
retail products that
pass-through wholesale
market price signals to
reward active efficiency
behaviours.

Introduce a real-time
carbon accounting
standard
 ake real-time carbon
M
data easy to access and
widely available
 ransition energy
T
efficiency ratings to
carbon efficiency ratings
and/or establish new
ones
Introduce obligations for
retailers to engage with
/ support customers
on active efficiency
measures

Design, operate and
actively manage ‘behind
the meter’ infrastructure
as DERs through
automated control and
interfacing with market
data
Procure electricity
and actively manage
demand and supply
according to its realtime price and carbon
content to minimise
cost and environmental
impact.

Operate and support
an active two-sided
electricity market
that supports full
‘behind the meter’ /
DER participation and
provide the products,
services and technology
interfaces to reward
active efficiency
behaviours.

F
 urther develop and
enhance suite of shortterm actions noted on
page 49. Government,
regulators and policy
makers must act swiftly
and decisively to create
the conditions for other
stakeholders to act over
the medium-term.

Long-term actions (10-20 years)
Monitor and report
progress towards 24/7
renewable energy
operations
Actively manage DERs
in real-time to minimise
cost and carbon
emissions.

Further develop and
enhance suite of
medium-term actions
noted above.

Eliminate any distinction
between in-front of
the meter / behind the
meter (DER) market
participation.

F
 urther develop and
enhance suite of
medium-term actions
noted above.

 evelop training and
D
awareness programs.

Grid-interactive efficient buildings discussion paper v.1



49

Grid-interactive efficient buildings discussion paper v.1



50

was established in 2002 and
Our role in driving GBCA
since then, we have developed rating
tools which are respected around
grid-interactive
the world, forged strong networks,
efficient buildings and built a strong reputation within

industry and government. By working
collaboratively to drive the uptake of

the Green Star rating system, we have
encouraged leadership, transformed
industry practice, and created
enduring value for asset owners,
investors, managers, and the people
who live, work, and play in buildings.

We lead the sustainable transformation of our built environment

Rate

Delivering climate
positive grid-interactive
efficient buildings
Global megatrends are shaping the
built environment like never before.

Advocate

Educate

Since then, we introduced the Grid
Resilience credit in Green Star
Buildings and Green Star Performance
v2. In the release of ‘A Climate Positive
Roadmap for Precincts’ we noted that
this issue would also be addressed
in Green Star Communities v2.

Climate action, resource efficiency
and health & wellbeing are at the
top of issues to address. Issues
related to these, such as resilience,
biodiversity and nature losses, and a
stronger focus on social impacts are

rising in importance. The megatrends
and issues can be best described
in this diagram (Figure 13), which
outlines how they are both distinct
issues and also interrelated.

FIGURE 13

Global megatrends and issues. Adapted from World Green Building Council
2020-2022 strategy

Resource
Resource
& &
circularity
Circularity

Driving a climate
positive built
environment

to set the context of a future situation
with the goal of building consensus on
what an appropriate response should
be from the private and public sectors.

The built environment is key to achieving our climate goals. Our Climate Positive
Roadmap outlines six elements needed to decarbonise the built environment:

Collaborate

In 2018, with the release of ‘A Climate
Positive Roadmap for Buildings and
Fitouts’, we emphasised the need to
resolve how the built environment
would need to interact with the
grid to continue driving further
decarbonisation of our sector.

Climate
Climate
Action
Action

As part of the Climate Action
megatrend, the built environment
must act now to decarbonise as
rapidly as possible. Key to this is the
built environment’s role in the context
of a changing grid. This paper aims

Health
Health
&&
Wellbeing
Wellbeing

1 1

Net
zero
emissions
Net
Zero
emissions

4 4

Circular
Circulareconomy
economy

7 7

Health and
and wellbeing
wellbeing

2 2

Climate
resilience
Climate
resilience

5 5

Embodied
Embodiedmaterials
materials

8 8

People
and equity
equity
People and

3 3

Nature
Nature

6 6

Water cycle
Water cycle

9 9

Community resilience
Community resilience

Grid-interactive efficient buildings discussion paper v.1



Lower embodied
emissions

Highly efficient

Fossil fuel-free

Uses lower carbon
products and
incentivises change
in the supply chain.

Reduces and manages
energy loads needed to
operate the building.

The building does
not use fossil fuels
for heating, cooling,
cooking or power,
and uses low impact
refrigerants.

Powered by
renewables

Offset with nature

Partner for success

The building is fully
powered by on-site
or off-site renewable
energy.

Invests in natural
solutions to capture
and store carbon from
non-energy carbon
emissions.

Assists tenants
and occupants to
decarbonise through
quantifying emissions
and procuring
renewables.

These six elements underpin our advocacy, education activities, and guide the
evolution of the Green Star rating tools. GEBs help resolve two of these: highly
efficient and fossil fuel free.
Our goal is simple: drive the built environment from net zero to zero.

51

Grid-interactive efficient buildings discussion paper v.1



52

Advocating for
grid-interactive
efficient buildings

A grid-interactive
Green Star

GBCA has identified the following key areas for governments to focus
their efforts in ensuring buildings can be part of the discussion as the grid
decarbonises.

Green Star aims to significantly
drive the decarbonisation of the
built environment. The Positive
category aims to challenge industry
to deliver fossil fuel free, highly
efficient buildings, fully powered by

Review building codes and standards to accelerate the
deployment of grid-interactive technologies
GBCA recommends introducing
consideration for grid-interactive
technologies in buildings as part
of the Australian Building Codes
Board’s workplan. This is in line with
recommendations from the IEA. In the
short term, we support reviewing the
content of the NCC and its supporting
standards to ensure all-electric
buildings are the norm and to ensure
all new buildings are designed and
delivered as all-electric buildings.
GBCA recommends that the Australian

Government, working with state
and territory governments should:
Introduce requirements for all
electric solutions for heating,
cooking, and hot water in buildings
Introduce requirements to account
for the future electrification of the
transport fleet and the effects on
the building’s electrical systems
Explore further requirements for
grid-interactive technologies for
introduction in future updates of
the NCC.

GBCA recommends that all levels of
government:
E
 xplore how incentive or rating
programs, such as NABERS, can be
used to incentivise electrification
and demand response solutions
in the built environment
P
 rovide guidance on how to ensure
utility infrastructure is upgraded to
address the increase in electricity
demand and demand response
solutions
D
 evelop a digital strategy that
will allow for the integration of

buildings as energy nodes in
the electricity system through
better use of data flows and
appropriate software, including
directing renewable energy
generation to the points of best
use, coordinating batteries in
millions of electric vehicles (via
buildings), synchronising heat
pumps, hot water systems and
other appliances

U
 ndertake research to understand
further opportunities for GEBs.
E
 xplore how to improve the current
renewable certificate scheme
to add real-time information in
preparation of potential changes
to the Greenhouse Gas Emissions
Protocol.

Responsible

Positive

Places

People

Nature

Leadership

a similar outcome. Figure 14, for
example, outlines the credits in Green
Star Performance v2.

Healthy

Resilient

Positive

 Industry development

 Clean air

 Climate change resilience

 Energy use

 Responsible operations

 Light quality

 Operation resilience

Energy source

 Ongoing operations

 Acoustic comfort

 Community resilence

 Tenant energy source

 esponsible Resource
R
Management

Exposure to toxins

Grid resilience

 Other carbon emissions

Responsible procurement

Pilot digitalisation technologies and
establish a program to implement
digitalisation technology and
demand flexibility in government
buildings.
Provide incentives, clear
communication, and education to
promote opportunities for testing
and delivering GEBs at scale.



Resilient

FIGURE 14

Introduce obligations for retailers to
engage with / support customers
on active efficiency measures.

Grid-interactive efficient buildings discussion paper v.1

Healthy

Driving a climate positive built environment in Green Star Performance v2

Invest in applied research and provide access to information
and tools
GBCA recommends that the Australian
Government, working with state
and territory governments should:

Responsible

Green Star Buildings, Green Star
Performance v2, and Green Star
Communities v2 will feature a
combination of credits that drive

Continue with efforts to decarbonise the grid, and enable
grid-integration

renewables. The resilient category
recognises that the infrastructure will
be critical in this decarbonisation step.
The grid resilience credit is within this
category.

53

 Connection to nature

 Upfront carbon emissions

 Thermal comfort

 Waste reduction

 Health promotion

 Water use

 Amenity and comfort

 Tenant fitout waste reduction

Places

People

Nature

Leadership

Movement and place

 Indigenous inclusion

 Impacts to nature

 Market transformation

 Enjoyable places

Procurement and workforce
economic inclusion

Biodiversity enhancement

 Leadership challenges

 Inclusive buildings

 Waterway protection

 Culture, heritage and identity
 Amenity diversity

 Privacy

 Nature stewardship

Grid-interactive efficient buildings discussion paper v.1



54

51. IEA, Net Zero by 2050: A Roadmap
for the Global Energy Sector.
Accessed April 2023

This new credit works in tandem with
the rest of the energy related credits in
the Positive Category. The table below
outlines how the multiple Green Star
rating tools align with the IEA’s criteria
for zero-carbon-ready buildings.51

As part of the redevelopment of the
rating system, and based on more
recent understanding of the rapidly

Description (adapted from IEA’s
definition)

Green Star
Credit

Energy use

Passive design, building upgrades,
efficient equipment and good operations
reduce energy demand

Energy use

Energy
supply

Buildings should be fossil fuel free, and
use local renewable generation and energy
storage in addition to grid renewables

Energy
source

Integration
with power
systems

Buildings must use automation to manage
electricity use, becoming a flexible
resource for the energy system.

Grid
Resilience

Buildings
and
construction
value chain

Materials selected should be the lowest
upfront carbon, with design solutions used
to reduce the need for products in the
building.

Upfront
carbon
emissions

Homes

IEA
definition

Communities
v2

transitioning grid, the decision was
made to develop grid resilience. This
new credit shared some elements of
the old credit, but featured a revised
outcome and areas of interest. The
new outcome states: The building is
more resilient to a transitioning grid,
grid events, and is reducing its burden
on the grid.

Performance
v2

Since the beginning, Green Star as
a rating system for buildings had
always had a credit for managing
peak energy, or electricity, demand in
some form. That credit, or its multiple
variations, had the aim: To encourage
the reduction of peak demand load on
the electricity network infrastructure.
That credit, which mostly went by
the name ‘Peak electricity demand
reduction’ was commonly met
through a combination of reducing
energy consumption in the building in
total’s demand, with some element of
additional generation.

Buildings

From peak electricity
demand reduction
to grid resilience in
Green Star

*

*

* G
 reen Star Homes has a requirement for ensuring batteries or other storage can be introduced at a later time.
Future updates of this standard will have requirements introduced on both topics.

Next steps in
Green Star

A key element in being able to further
deliver GEBs is the lack of indicators
that can be used to measure success.
While we currently have indicators
in Australia for energy efficiency and
greenhouse gas emissions in the
building sector, we lack indicators to
understand how to shift from ‘net’ zero
buildings to zero carbon buildings.
As part of future development
of Green Star, and in continued
partnership with NABERS, we will

Grid-interactive efficient buildings discussion paper v.1



55

work with industry to develop a
potential ‘time of use’ indicator that
can be used to benchmark a building’s
use of renewables in real time. This
work is expected to occur in 2024,
starting with the development of
leadership challenges for Green Star
Performance v2.
If you are interested in assisting us in
this area, please contact us via this
survey.

Grid-interactive efficient buildings discussion paper v.1



56

Taking action
today is critical
52. AEMO, 2022 Integrated System
Plan, Accessed April 2023
53. Infrastructure Australia,
Infrastructure Workforce Skills
Supply Workforce, Accessed April
2023
54. WELD Australia, 2023 Member
Survey, Accessed April 2023

Let’s work together
to help deliver gridinteractive buildings

With coordinated action from GEBs…

The clean energy transition and electrification of the built
environment will cost less.
AEMO, in its ISP published in June
2022, has projected a nine-fold
increase in grid-scale wind and solar
capacity and a near five-fold increase
in distributed solar by 2050. To
accommodate this transformation
of the Australian electricity system,
AEMO has called for “urgent efforts”
to invest $12.7 billion in currently
actionable transmission infrastructure
projects. This investment constitutes
about 4% of the $315 billion total
spend “needed to develop, operate
and maintain the generation, storage

and future network investments of the
NEM to 2050”.52
While AEMO’s modelling takes into
consideration the energy efficiency
policies of state and federal
governments, currently there are
limited policies outside of NSW (see
NSW Peak Energy Demand Reduction
Scheme breakout box on p.24) to
harness the potential for GEBs. AEMO
has therefore had to assume an
unnecessarily high cost to provide
additional generation, storage, and
network infrastructure.

This document aims to start a
discussion on how to deliver GEBs,
and there’s plenty more to do
before we can ultimately deliver
them. GBCA aims to release further
work and updates to Green Star to
address this topic. We also aim to
work with partners such as NABERS
to continue advocating for better
building and grid integration.
We all have a role to play in delivering
a more resilient built environment.
We are calling on industry to:
Achieve Green Star certification
for your buildings

update our Green Star rating tools.
 oin us in providing feedback on
J
this paper through this survey
 upport GBCA’s policy platform by
S
advocating for more transparency
in the energy sector
 eek the support of government
S
to make the necessary changes to
policy and codes
 artner with us to deliver skills,
P
services, and mechanisms to drive
change in industry
 elp us build a market for a
H
climate positive built environment.

Be involved as we continue to

The electricity system will be more stable.
As noted by AEMO, even if actionable
projects “progress as urgently as
possible”, in some cases “the optimal
timing would be earlier than what
is achievable” (p.12). Large-scale
infrastructure investments can be
delayed for myriad reasons, including
shortages in the availability of
labour, skills, finance, and materials
and the need to take community
and environmental considerations
into account. For example, by 2024
Australia is expected have a shortfall
of 41,000 engineering professionals
required to deliver currently committed

public infrastructure projects53
and Weld Australia is forecasting a
shortfall of 70,000 welders by 2030.54
Stop-gap measures may be required
to maintain grid stability and address
delays in the delivery of planned
infrastructure investments. These
include involuntary curtailment
(shutting off) of variable renewable
energy generation during favourable
wind and solar conditions and brownouts, black-outs, and involuntary load
shedding at times of peak demand.

Renewable energy investment returns will be higher.
Because non-dispatchable renewable
energy generators like wind and
solar rely on the weather, they must
use financial instruments or storage
technologies to manage their market
exposure and access the most
favourable pricing. Alternatively, they
can just disconnect from the grid at
times when weather conditions are
good and wholesale power prices are
negative.
All of these approaches are costly
and discourage investment because

they diminish investment returns.
By contrast, if so-called ‘firming’
can instead be provided from GEBs
shifting their demand according to
the availability of clean energy, the
wholesale market price becomes more
stable. Excess generation at times of
high wind and solar availability will be
taken up by buildings at a fair price to
the generators, thus enhancing their
investment returns and driving more
investment.

Grid-interactive efficient buildings discussion paper v.1



57

Grid-interactive efficient buildings discussion paper v.1



58

Appendix A:
definitions

Grid interactivity is a rapidly evolving area. As such, terminology
can evolve quickly too. The list below outlines key terms and their
definitions as intended in this paper.

Load management or demand-side management: The process of balancing
the supply of electricity on the network with the electrical load by adjusting or
controlling the load rather than the power station output.

24/7 renewable energy: A situation where every kilowatt-hour of electricity
consumption is met with carbon-free electricity sources, every hour of every day,
everywhere. It is the end state of a fully decarbonised electricity system.

Net zero carbon buildings: The World Green Building Council defines a net
zero carbon building as a highly energy efficient building that produces on-site,
or procures, enough renewable energy to meet building operations energy
consumption annually.

Active efficiency: A method to optimise energy usage that combines traditional
energy efficiency and demand response measures with the opportunities
afforded by digital technology (such as smart meters).

Virtual Power Plant (VPPs): A network of DERs that work together to perform
services resembling the output of a power plant.

Baseload capacity: The minimum level of demand on an energy grid over a
specific period, such as a week. This demand can be met by power plants,
dispatchable generation or a collection of smaller intermittent energy sources.
Demand for electricity fluctuates vastly throughout a day, so baseload power
may not necessarily be enough.

Zero-carbon-ready building: Defined by the International Energy Agency (IEA)
as a highly energy efficient building that either uses renewable energy directly or
uses an energy supply that will be fully decarbonised by 2050, such as electricity
or district heat.

Curtailment: Any deliberate action taken by grid managers that reduces the
amount of electricity generated within an energy grid (such as turning off solar
or wind power). This action is usually taken to maintain the balance between
supply and demand to manage voltage and power quality.
Demand response: A voluntary reduction or shift in the rate of electricity
consumption undertaken by a building owner or operator. It can help balance
electricity supply and demand, ensuring a power grid is stable, flexible and
reliable. This is particularly important as power grids are comprised of an
increasingly large share of renewable energy.
Distributed energy resource (DER): Resources that are connected to the
distribution system that generate or store electricity, or actively manage
electricity demand. These resources may be connected behind-the-meter
(rooftop solar or household batteries) or in-front-of-the-meter (community-scale
battery). It may also include electric vehicles and related charging and vehicleto-grid infrastructure, and technology used to actively manage a consumer’s
electricity demand.
Energy efficiency: An ongoing reduction in energy use to provide the same
or improved functionality. For example, energy-efficient LED light bulbs use
75% to 80% less electricity, while still producing the same amount of light as
incandescent light bulbs.
Firming: Maintaining the output from a variable, intermittent power source, such
as wind or solar, for a committed period of time.
Grid-interactive efficient building: An energy-efficient building that uses smart
technologies and on-site DERs to provide demand flexibility to reduce GHG
emissions while optimising for energy costs, grid services, and occupant needs.
A grid-interactive efficient building is capable of providing energy-efficient
building services and dynamic grid services through connected, smart control of
multiple flexible building loads and DERs.

Grid-interactive efficient buildings discussion paper v.1



59

Grid-interactive efficient buildings discussion paper v.1



60

Australia’s Electricity
System

Range

1. Key findings

Consumption
(commercial / inst.)

kWh/m2

225

100-350

Source: NABERS reverse
calculator, assumes a ~3-star
average all-electric building

Consumption
(residential)

kWh/m2

46

20-70

Source: Various online, author
experience, assumes ave
dwelling 25kWh/day, 200m2

Demand (commercial
/ inst.)

W/m2

40

25-60

Source: Buildings Alive data

Demand (residential)

W/m2

20

10-40

Source: Various online, author
experience, assumes ave
dwelling 4kW peak 1/2 hourly
demand, 200m2

Office buildings

m2

70

Source: author estimate
based on PCA investment
grade

Retail buildings

m2

50

Source: author estimate
based on PCA investment
grade

Institutional buildings

m2

30

Source: estimate

Other buildings

m2

50

Source: estimate

Residential

m2

1400

Source: author estimate,
assumes 25M population,
3.5 people per 200m2
household (57m2 per person)

 uildings account for approximately 50% of Australia’s electricity
B
consumption, residential / non-residential split is ~60/40
Approximately 77% of Australia’s available electricity system capacity at peak
times is used by residential and non-residential buildings
If 30% of electricity demand from buildings was shifted from peak times
to the middle of the day, 23% would be added to Australia’s dispatchable
capacity, this is equivalent to:
– 47% of Australia’s existing coal generation capacity
– 98% of Australia’s existing gas and liquid-fuelled generation capacity

Unit

Range

This paper calculated benefits related to GEBs. They are
presented here to allow for review and improvement.

Peak

Appendix B:
Calculating
the benefits of
grid-interactive
buildings

Annual
Estimate

Summer/Winter

– 154% of Australia’s existing hydro generation capacity
– 720% of Australia’s existing pumped hydro & battery storage capacity
If that amount of load shift occurred for three hours every weekday, i.e.
driving up demand for three hours in the middle of the day and reducing
it by the same amount in the morning / evening (but not reducing overall
consumption):
– Australia’s GHG emissions would reduce by 0.5%
– The cost of supplying electricity to Australia’s commercial, institutional and
residential buildings each year would reduce by $1.5 billion.

Currently, the NEM relies on dispatchable firm capacity from:

Grid-interactive efficient buildings discussion paper v.1



61

Coal-fired generation

23,000

Source: here

Gas-fired and liquidfuelled generation

11,000

Source: here

Hydro generation

7,000

Source: here

Pumped hydro &
battery storage

1,500

Source: here

TOTAL MW

42,500

Source: here

Grid-interactive efficient buildings discussion paper v.1



62

NEM carbon intensity
evening / morning

kg/kWh

NEM carbon intensity
middle of day

kg/kWh

0.8

0.5

Range

Annual
Estimate

Unit

Range

Australia’s Electricity
System

Peak

Summer/Winter

Australia’s Electricity
System

CALCULATIONS (NB. these include WA SWIS as well as the NEM)
Consumption
(commercial / inst.)

GWh/yr

45,000

20%

Source: Buildings Alive,
generated from NEM fuel-mix
data

Consumption
(residential)

GWh/yr

64,400

29%

Consumption (nonbuilding uses)

GWh/yr

110,600

50%

Consumption - ALL

GWh/yr

220,000

100%

Demand (commercial /
inst.)

MW

8,000

17%

Demand (residential)

MW

28,000

60%

Other sources of
demand (at peak times)

MW

10,750

23%

Dispatchable capacity AU ALL

MW

46,750

100%

$/MWh

200

Source: Buildings Alive,
generated from NEM fuel-mix
data

Wholesale price
middle of the day

$/MWh

20

Source: Buildings Alive,
generated from NEM fuel-mix
data

kt CO2-e

Quantity % of total

Source: Buildings Alive,
generated from NEM fuel-mix
data

Wholesale price
evening / morning

Australia's national
greenhouse gas
emissions account

Unit

50%

Source: derived from here (FY22
approx. 200GWh on the NEM and
20GWh on the SWIS)

77%

488,000

Assuming a peak load shift in buildings of …

Grid-interactive efficient buildings discussion paper v.1



63

of Australia’s annual electricity
consumption comes from buildings

of Australia's available capacity at
peak times is used by residential and
non-residential buildings

33%

Peak demand reduction
(commercial / inst.)

MW

2,640

(equiv. peak capacity increase)

Peak demand reduction
(residential)

MW

9,240

(equiv. peak capacity increase)

Dispatchable capacity
from buildings

MW

11,880

25%

would be added to Australia's
dispatchable capacity

52%

of Australia's existing coal generation
capacity

108%

of Australia's existing gas and liquidfuelled generation capacity

170%

of Australia's existing hydro generation
capacity

792%

of Australia's existing pumped hydro &
battery storage capacity

Grid-interactive efficient buildings discussion paper v.1



64

Australia’s Electricity
System

Unit

Quantity

…and assuming peak to daytime load shift is for…
Reduction in emissions
(commercial / inst.)

kt/yr

618

Reduction in emissions
(residential)

kt/yr

2,162

Reduction in emissions
from buildings

kt/yr

2,780

Reduction in
electricity supply cost
(commercial / inst.)

$ mil

371

Reduction in electricity $ mil
supply cost (residential)

1,297

Reduction in electricity
supply cost to buildings

$ mil

3

hours per day, 5 days per week

0.57%

reduction in Australia's total annual
greenhouse gas emissions

$1,668

reduction in the cost of supplying
electricity to Australia's commercial,
institutional and residential buildings
each year

2. Some other points to consider
In the United States, buildings account for
approximately 75% of electricity consumption (www.
energy.gov/quadrennial-technology-review-2015), so our
50% may be an underestimate

GEBs are an enabler for other DER storage and flex
technologies, because they can pass on the signal to
do the flex / store. This includes operation of stationary
batteries and EV charging

Shifting some load to the middle of the day can be
expected to drive up wholesale prices in the middle of
the day and down at the ends. This would support more
renewable energy investment, particularly solar

The GEB flexibility envisaged in this analysis can be
expected to deliver co-benefits for building occupants
including enhanced indoor environmental quality (IEQ)

Wholesale electricity prices regularly go negative on
the NEM – in SA, multiple times per week. Our analysis
assumes that they remain positive at a level that
supports substantial PV investment growth ($20/MWh),
an important co-benefit
 ome may consider a 33% load shift for 3 hours large.
S
However, currently, building operators / occupiers (and
their equipment) do not receive dynamic price signals
(perversely, their incentive is to avoid ‘peak’ pricing in the
middle of the day)

More broadly, co-benefits of a GEB strategy include
better utilisation of existing network infrastructure and
avoided transmission capacity, free up bottlenecks
in the economy (steel, engineers and welders can do
something else), least environmentally harmful / least
toxic / wasteful solution
GEB flexibility could start being delivered at scale within
months. The envisaged 23% capacity increase could
comfortably be achieved by 2030 – fastest and best
value of all the available options.

Grid-interactive efficient buildings discussion paper v.1



65

Grid-interactive efficient buildings discussion paper v.1



66

Appendix C:
A review
of industry
knowledge

As part of this discussion paper, we held three workshops to capture the
understanding of the issues related to the built environment and the ongoing
evolution of the grid to 100% renewables. The work captured views from across
the sector from building owners, consultants, energy utility companies and
policy makers, on where priority actions lie and where coordinated, collaborative
action could make a difference.
The aim of this exercise was to understand current industry understanding to
help shape the discussion points in the rest of the paper. This was not intended
to be a comprehensive review, but rather a starting point to help inform next
steps.
Consultation: Three sessions with a total of 30 participants were held. The
three workshops were held independent of each other. One workshop involved
building developers and consultants, the second with utility companies and
service providers, and the third one with policymakers.

Current situation

As part of the consultation exercise, we also asked industry participants to note
what actions they were taking today. The responses can be grouped into five
areas:
On-site energy
production and storage

Installing on-site renewable and storage
Adding solar PV to rooftops and installing
batteries for load management and load
shifting.

Energy efficiency and
demand management

 esigning electrified buildings and advising
D
clients on electrification options
Installing EV chargers with load demand
management
Implementing energy efficiency measures and
investigating grid interactivity
Coordinating major tenancy refits with
sustainability upgrades
Persuading clients to eliminate gas heating
Designing frameworks for existing building
ratings to provide information on energy
use and the contribution of solar and energy
efficiency to reducing demand and bills.

Measurement and
verification

Investigating standardised measurement
and verification for calculation of hourly load
profiles and peak savings.

Research and
development

 reparing for the integration of distributed
P
energy resources through studies
Participating in demand management and
information analytics research projects.

Outreach and
collaboration

 ducating clients on new opportunities
E
Examining the use of real-time carbon as a
driver for building management
Coordinating with local governments to
bundle and connect tools and incentives and
engage with targeted communities to drive
change
Collaborating with other organisations
through impact partnerships to promote
market change, best practice tools and
guidelines, and innovation.

The consultation session involved participants considering one or multiple
scenarios that may occur in the future and being asked to define the scenario
and address challenges and opportunities.
Attendees
Alan Fok, Dexus
Craig Roussac, Buildings Alive
David Hershan, Shell Energy
David Pryor, NSW Government
Declan Kelly, Flow Power
Ed White,
Geoff Hilboune, Grovesnor Place
Ian lieblich, EG Funds
Jackson Hobbs,
James Pikover, Voltage
James Vesper, Goodman
Jo Brennan, DECCEW
John Derrick, Grovesnor Place
Kate Read, Resilient Sydney
Lester Partridge, LCI Consultants
Lisa Hinde, Colliers

Louise Brian,
Manuela Crank, Property NSW
Matt Williams, Lendlease
Mel Dewsnap, City of Sydney
Michael Karaiskos, Brookfield
Rob Brimblecombe, Monash
University
Rob Hughes, DCCEW
Sally Moxham, Sustainability
Victoria
Simon English, Powercor
Stephen White, CSIRO
Steve Hennessy, WT Consulting
Steve Refshauge,
Tim Grigg, Property NSW
Tim Wheeler, Property Council of
Australia

Understanding priorities: Overall, the feedback received on the workshop
focused on a range of topics related to the transition to smarter, renewablepowered buildings and grid interactivity. Participants were asked what they
wanted to get out of the workshop and the topic at hand.
Participants in the workshop were interested in learning about the current state
of renewable-powered buildings and grid interactivity, as well as regulatory
barriers and opportunities. They wanted to understand the role of buildings
in the transition and how they could interact with the grid. They also wanted
to discuss conditions that could accelerate the adoption of grid interactive
technology. Many participants noted they were interested in learning about the
perspectives of utilities, energy companies, and retailers on the opportunity for
grid interactive buildings. They were also seeking insights on the pathways for
implementation of research findings and the potential for pilot opportunities, as
well as the role of government intervention.
Grid-interactive efficient buildings discussion paper v.1



67

Grid-interactive efficient buildings discussion paper v.1



68

The five scenarios

One of the key challenges identified as part of this work is trying to identify what
the future looks like with regards to the relationship between the grid and the
built environment.
To help understand what distinct stakeholders felt would be the future that they
would be expecting to work towards, five scenarios were set out. Stakeholders
were asked to place themselves in one of these scenarios and asked to define
them further.

Defining scenarios

Once scenarios were selected, participants were asked to define, for each
scenario, what they believed the future looked like in 2035 for the grid and for
buildings. These are described below.

Scenario 2
Grid

By 2035, the grid is expected to be close to 100%
renewable. The grid will be able to generate electricity
from all directions without any constraints. To achieve
this goal, a lot of work will be dedicated to managing peak
demand and using storage solutions as these elements
will drive infrastructure costs and development. This will
in turn move design decisions to consider more strongly
the impact of peak demand reduction, with price signals
highlighting this point.

Buildings

By 2035, buildings will play a role in managing grid impacts
by being efficient and reducing emissions through peak
demand response and the use of smart infrastructure.
As the grid decarbonises, large buildings and precincts
will have improved monitoring systems to manage their
demand. However, much of the existing building stock may
not change significantly. There will be a lot of variation
in the capacity of different buildings to manage their
consumption and emissions, with large and well-managed
buildings being the main active players and smaller
buildings relying on coordination from the grid.

The diagram below outlines the scenarios and the number of stakeholders that
assigned themselves to each.

Scenario 1

Scenario 2

Scenario 3

Scenario 4

Scenario 5

The grid (and other
parts of the economy)
provides solutions for
generation, demand
management, and
resilience with no
assistance from the
built environment.

The grid (and
other parts of the
economy) provides
some solutions for
generation, demand,
and resilience, with
the built environment
assisting somewhat.

The grid (and
other parts of the
economy) and the
built environment
equally share the
responsibility
for solutions for
generation, demand,
and resilience.

The built environment
(and other parts
of the economy)
take a more active
role in solutions for
generation, demand,
and resilience, with
the grid supporting
this work.

The built environment
(and other parts
of the economy)
take a significant
role in solutions for
generation, demand,
and resilience, with
the grid just focusing
on generation.

4 Owners and
consultants
4 Policymakers

7 Owners and
consultants
5 Policymakers
5 Energy utilities
and retailers

5 Policymakers

Grid-interactive efficient buildings discussion paper v.1

Scenario 3



69

Grid

In 2035, the grid is expected to be 100% renewable with
large-scale energy storage. The grid will operate on a
distributed model and offer flexible demand/generation
options based on availability and pricing. There will be a
significant increase in renewable energy for transport and
industry, and the use of fossil fuels will decrease. There
may be a shift from energy efficiency to maximising use of
cheap, renewable energy.

Buildings

In 2035, there is a strong partnership between the grid
and buildings, with buildings operating demand response
solutions in coordination with the grid. There will be
increased electrification and the use of EVs to support
peaks, with building owners investing in electrification and
automated demand management. Virtual power plants
and energy sharing platforms may be well-established, but
there may still be some unchanged buildings and a range
of capabilities among buildings and owners. Regulatory
barriers to energy sharing by decentralised buildings may
have been resolved, and NABERS may have evolved to
focus on more than just energy efficiency.

Grid-interactive efficient buildings discussion paper v.1



70

Scenario 4
Grid

The grid in 2035 will be primarily distributing DERs with a
smaller share of centrally-generated electricity. It will send
flex signals to the market, which will mostly be located
behind the meter through buildings and their DERs, to
optimise for cost and carbon outcomes. The grid will
also use dynamic operating envelopes and commercial
incentives for realtime flexibility to meet demand. Hourly
Renewable Energy Certificates or other time-of-use carbon
certificates will drive generation and usage behaviours with
the goal of reducing carbon emissions. The grid will include
a large amount of firming, such as storage, to dispatch as
needed to meet demand.

Buildings

In 2035, buildings will be using intelligent energy
management systems with smart DERs to optimise their
energy demand and supply for cost and carbon. They
will focus on moving their energy demand to times when
renewables are cheap and plentiful and may use electric
vehicles (EVs) as storage during peak demand. Demand
charges will be dynamic, requiring buildings to continuously
adapt their strategies, and equipment will be connected
to markets and automated in response. Gas usage in
buildings will likely be minimal.

In summary,
Regardless of which scenario one considers, in all cases:
The grid and buildings will need to have a strong partnership, with buildings
operating distributed energy resources (DERs) and offering demand/export
services in coordination with the grid – the difference is the extent of the
partnership
There will likely need to be changes to encourage more energy sharing and
demand management solutions

Buildings are expected to have smart infrastructure and be able to control
their demand and generation in response to real-time emissions and the
needs of the grid

Challenges
When asked, correspondents noted significant challenges to being successful
in any of the scenarios above. In particular, the following six challenges were
highlighted:
Infrastructure constraints: The need to upgrade and/or retrofit existing
infrastructure, such as electrical systems and the grid, as well as existing
buildings is a common challenge mentioned in all three scenarios
Regulatory challenges: The pace of regulatory change and the need to
regulate various aspects of energy systems and infrastructure was noted. It
was noted the grid was decarbonising significantly quicker than expected,
and policies and plans had not adjusted to suit
Demand response: Introducing and further cementing demand response
initiatives in construction and building operations was noted repeatedly. A
key challenge was identifying the level of action and infrastructure needed
at a building, precinct, or grid level – with opinions split between all three
scenarios
Cultural challenges: The need to overcome cultural challenges, such as the
difficulty in winning over building owners and operators, is mentioned in
all three scenarios. It became clear throughout the consultation process
that there were multiple expectations of what needed to be done, but
consideration of where responsibility lied differ. This was also the case due to
the problems with the cost of deploying any solution
Data access and integration: The need for better structured and cloudconnected building data and the integration of context data and grid signals
was repeatedly mentioned. Participants noted that while information was
available, it was difficult to parse, or wasn’t linked to performance data in any
meaningful way
Fair cost of power: Ensuring that the cost of power is fair and that the grid is
paid fairly for its services was also repeatedly mentioned.

Aging buildings and lack of space for storage and large electrical
infrastructure. Older buildings not designed with local solar and battery in
mind
Challenge of retrofitting smart grid-interactive metering

There will be increased electrification, and a level of storage and demand
management solutions at the building or precinct level required. Optimising
energy use and minimising demand and emissions will continue to be a
focus, though managing peak demand will play a larger part.



While participants were asked to note challenges that needed to be overcome
to achieve their desired scenario, and the opportunities that presented if their
scenario became true, upon review of all of the feedback it became clear that all
scenarios shared similar challenges and opportunities.

However, in addition to the above, there were items that were common amongst
scenarios, but mentioned less frequently. These are:

There may be a range of capabilities among buildings and owners, with some
buildings and owners being more advanced than others

Grid-interactive efficient buildings discussion paper v.1

Challenges and
opportunities

71

Building codes not adequately dealing with the issue of peak demand, energy
storage, or electric vehicles in buildings
Buildings optimising on-site generation for themselves rather than overall
emissions or grid services.

Grid-interactive efficient buildings discussion paper v.1



72

Challenges and
opportunities (cont.)

Opportunities
When asked, correspondents noted significant opportunities that would be
available in any of the scenarios above. In particular, the following six challenges
were highlighted:

Carbon pricing
and energy
efficiency

Decentralised generation: The use of decentralised generation, such as
on-site solar and battery systems, is mentioned in all three scenarios as a
means of avoiding the need for expensive infrastructure investments and
improving grid stability

Collaboration and cross-industry engagement: The need for collaboration
and engagement across various sectors and industries is mentioned in all
three scenarios as a means of scaling solutions and driving change
Electrification and the rise of energy storage: The electrification of buildings
and the rise of localised storage and electric vehicles is mentioned
as a potential opportunity. It was noted that smart electrification was
fundamental to ensuring buildings could respond in real time
Efficiency and cost reduction: Continued focus on driving down energy
consumption, and peak consumption was seen as a great opportunity
to drive down energy costs. In particular, the link between peak demand
management and energy efficient buildings, and the need to reduce
infrastructure investment was seen as a powerful opportunity that was yet to
be explored fully
Market dynamics and pricing: The use of market dynamics and pricing to
drive behaviour change would drive new potential revenue opportunities that
would make investing in transforming existing buildings possible.

When asked, correspondents noted there were several actions that they
would want to see from all stakeholders to ensure success. As with the above,
stakeholders were asked to do this with their chosen scenario – however,
analysis showed that while the amount that needed to be done differed between
scenarios, the broad levers were similar:
Renewable
energy and
storage

S
 hift the focus from energy efficiency to carbon efficiency,
calculated in real time, and implement carbon accounting
standards that recognise demand flexibility
P
 romote real-time carbon accounting and increase
disclosure across all building types.

Demand response and real-time carbon tracking: The use of demand
response initiatives and real-time carbon tracking that would be needed in all
scenarios would provide opportunity to further reduce emissions, particularly
as the grid arrives to near-100% renewable state

What would industry
like to see from all
stakeholders?

Implement a carbon pricing mechanism and add carbon
pricing to existing white certificate schemes

Accelerate the move to 100% renewable energy and
increase renewable generation, grid storage, and stability
infrastructure

Grid
participation
and market
design

P
 rovide practical guidance and technology support to
users at different scales to assist with the transition to a
more sustainable energy system
E
 stablish a clear connection between energy markets and
demand signals and provide incentives for GEBs
P
 romote community grid participation and reimagine the
full value stack to allow deferred network investment to
flow through to end users
Implement simple market design with clear market
signals and update current rules around embedded
networks and microgrids to allow flexibility
E
 ncourage leadership and bravery in government to try
new approaches and provide a roadmap for the grid
F
 oster a shift in people’s relationship with energy and
make the transition to a more sustainable energy system
intuitive and easy for everyone.

There were other items that were discussed, including,
T
 he need for technologies to enable buildings to interact with the grid in both
directions
T
 he importance of mandatory disclosure, policies regarding energy
management systems and vehicle-to-grid integration, and the requirement
for developments to contribute to new renewable and storage infrastructure
T
 he need for actual disclosure of the source of electricity used, behind-themeter net energy metering equivalent systems, and clear market signals
T
 he need for greater flexibility in accessing and using the network to
distribute power, incentives for GEBs, and a shift in focus from efficiency to
demand management.

Make EVs and battery storage cheaper and increase the
use of hydrogen storage.

Grid-interactive efficient buildings discussion paper v.1



73

Grid-interactive efficient buildings discussion paper v.1



74

References and further
information

ACEEE, ACEEE, State of the Market: Grid-Interactive Efficient Building Utility
Programs, Accessed April 2023

Evans, B., & Sidat, S. (2018), The use of temporal factors for improved CO2
emissions accounting in buildings. Building Services Engineering Research and
Technology, 39(2), 196–210. , Accessed April 2023

ACEEE, Summer Study on Energy Efficiency in Buildings, Accessed April 2023
AEMC, Wholesale demand response mechanism, Accessed April 2023
AEMC, Wholesale demand response mechanism final rule, Accessed April 2023

Greenhouse Gas Protocol, Scope 2 Guidance – background memo and list of
questions, Accessed April 2023

AEMO, Engineering Roadmap to 100% Renewables, Accessed April 2023

IEA, Net Zero by 2050: A Roadmap for the Global Energy Sector, Accessed April
2023

AEMO, National Electricity Market Fact Sheet, Accessed April 2023

IEA, Demand Response, Technology Deep Dive, Accessed April 2023

AEMO, Maintaining operational demand in South Australia on 14 March 2021,
Accessed April 2023

Infrastructure Australia, Infrastructure Workforce Skills Supply Workforce,
Accessed April 2023

AEMO, 2022 Integrated System Plan, Accessed April 2023

IRENA, Renewable Energy Power Generation Costs 2021, Accessed April 2023

Alliance to Save Energy, Why Demand Flexibility Is Essential For
Decarbonization, Accessed April 2023

New Buildings Institute, GridOptimal Metrics Offer Guidance on Optimizing
Building-Grid Interaction, Accessed April 2023

ARENA, What are distributed energy sources, Accessed April 2023

PV Magazine, A tale of two causes curtailment as renewable records break,
Accessed April 2023

ASBEC, Unlocking the pathway: Why electrification is the key to net zero
buildings, Accessed April 2023
Business Renewable Centre, Corporate Renewable Power Purchase Agreements
in Australia: State of the Market 2022
California Energy Commission, 2019 California Energy Efficiency Action Plan,
Accessed April 2023
California Public Utilities Commission, Assessment of energy efficiency potential
and goals and modification of portfolio approval and oversight process,
Accessed April 2023
Clean Energy Council, Clean Energy Australia Report, Accessed April 2023
CSIRO & DeltaQ, Digital Innovation Opportunity for Energy Productivity in NonResidential Buildings, Accessed April 2023
Dahl Knudsen, M. and Petersen, S. (2016). , Demand response potential of model
predictive control of space heating based on price and carbon dioxide intensity
signals. Energy and Buildings, 125, pp.196-204. , Accessed April 2023

Xu, Q., & Jenkins, J., Princeton University, Electricity System and Market Impacts
of Time-based Attribute Trading and 24/7 Carbon-free Electricity Procurement,
Accessed April 2023
Risner, J., & Sutherland, A. (2021). , Static grid carbon factors – Can we do
better? Building Services Engineering Research and Technology, 42(3), 257–
277., Accessed April 2023
RMI, Clean Power by the Hour, Accessed April 2023
UNEP, 2020 Global Status Report for Buildings and Construction: Towards a
Zero-emissions, Efficient and Resilient Buildings and Construction Sector Executive Summary (unep.org), Accessed April 2023
United Nations Environment Programme (2022). , 24/7 Carbon-free Energy
Compact, Accessed April 2023
US Department of Energy, A National Roadmap for Grid-Interactive Efficient
Buildings, Accessed April 2023

Department of Climate Change, Energy, the Environment and Water, National
Greenhouse Accounts Factors: 2021. , Accessed April 2023

US Department of Energy, Confronting the Duck Curve: How to Address OverGeneration of Solar Energy, Accessed April 2023

Energy Efficiency Council, Clean Energy, Clean Demand, Accessed April 2023

USGBC, GridOptimal Building ACP, Accessed April 2023

Energy Networks Australia, Electricity Network Transformation Roadmap,
Accessed April 2023

WELD Australia, 2023 Member Survey, Accessed April 2023

Energy Transformation Taskforce, Western Australia, Whole of System Plan,
Accessed April 2023
Energy Transformation Taskforce, Western Australia, Distributed Energy
Resources Roadmap, Accessed April 2023
ESB, Integration of Consumer Energy Resources (CER) and flexible demand
(2023), Accessed April 2023

Grid-interactive efficient buildings discussion paper v.1



75

Grid-interactive efficient buildings discussion paper v.1



76

Grid-interactive efficient buildings discussion paper v.1



077

