A practical guide to
upfront carbon reductions
For new buildings and major
refurbishments

Established in 2002, Green Building Council of Australia (GBCA) is
the nation’s authority on sustainable buildings, communities and cities.
Our vision is for healthy, resilient and positive places for people.
Our purpose is to lead the sustainable transformation of the built
environment. GBCA represents more than 550 individual companies
with a combined annual turnover of more than $46 billion.

Principal partner

Lendlease is proud to be principal partner of the Practical guide to
upfront carbon reductions. As a global integrated real estate group, we
draw on decades of experience and the latest thinking in development,
design, placemaking, construction and investments to deliver iconic and
inclusive places for everyone. We’re a 1.5 degree aligned company and
aim to create $250 million of social value by 2025. We have clear
decarbonisation plans in place and we measure the positive impact we
are making in communities around the world.
GBCA thanks Lendlease for their contributions in this guide, and for
allowing the use of their "Low Embodied Carbon Guideline" which has
informed various sections.

Funding partners

The National Australian Built Environment Rating Scheme (NABERS) is a
world-leading national government program that provides simple, reliable
and comparable sustainability measurements across multiple building
sectors like offices, hotels, shopping centres and more. NABERS provides
an annual rating for a building’s efficiency in energy, water, waste or
indoor environment quality. Over the last 20 years NABERS has proven
that measurement leads to better management. Buildings that have
obtained NABERS ratings for a decade achieve energy savings of 30-40%
on average.
Sustainability Victoria’s purpose is to transition Victoria to a circular,
climate-resilient economy. Sustainability Victoria does this by
contributing to achieving the Government’s targets for 2025 and 2030 in
recycling and net-zero emissions. We work together in partnership with
our stakeholders in industry, business, entrepreneurs, research
institutions, schools, households, individuals, community groups and
governments within Victoria and across Australia. To achieve our goals,
SV will lead and support industries on how we design, make, and use the
products and materials in our economy.

Technical partner

Mott MacDonald has been delivering projects in Australia for over 40
years and focuses on creating sustainable social outcomes across the
Transport, Advisory, Built Environment, Water and Energy sectors. As a
leading multidisciplinary buildings consultant in Australia, we specialise
in developing sustainable solutions in building structures, services, and
engineering sciences.
We bring the advanced digital systems and infrastructure that you
would expect from a 18,000 strong global organisation, with over
1,200 staff across Australia.

The information provided in this guide is for illustrative purposes only. In all cases, building owners are encouraged to consult
with dedicated professionals to assist them in reducing upfront carbon emissions.

A practical guide to upfront carbon reductions

A practical guide to upfront carbon reductions

This guide provides information on reducing upfront carbon emissions in
new buildings and major refurbishments. The guide outlines steps to be
taken during the design and construction process and offers solutions for
common challenges. It is intended to be used alongside a calculation
guide1 that was released in December 2022.

Delivering
Climate
Positive
Buildings

The diagram shows typical steps to decarbonise buildings in line with
our Climate Positive Roadmap2. This guide covers how to reduce upfront
carbon emissions. It addresses absolute reductions of carbon in the
material production and construction processes. Separate guides3 exist
on making new and existing buildings fossil fuel free. We encourage you
to apply these steps throughout your portfolio.

Understand upfront carbon

Standard building

Everything you wanted to know about upfront carbon (but were afraid to
ask) ● The case for reducing upfront carbon ● Policies driving action ●
The investor case for upfront carbon reductions ● Market solutions
driving change

Measure typical greenhouse gas
(GHG) emissions due to energy
use and construction, repair,
maintenance & refurbishment
and end of life.

Upfront carbon in buildings
What is a typical building’s upfront carbon? ● Where is the upfront
carbon? ● Upfront vs. embodied ● How to measure upfront carbon ●
Measuring reductions

Fossil fuel free
Eliminate natural gas for
space heating, domestic hot
water and cooking, both
base building and tenants.

Setting targets and getting to zero
Developing upfront carbon targets ● What targets should you set? ●
Reducing carbon at each stage of the process ● Getting to zero upfront
carbon today

Highly efficient
Legend

What to do at each stage of the process
Roles in the project lifecycle ● Feasibility & brief ● What strategies work
best? ● Concept and detailed design ● Design consideration in reducing
a project’s upfront carbon ● Tender ● Construction ● Handover

Case studies
25 King Street ● Substation No. 164 ● Burwood Brickworks ● Quay
Quarter Tower

GHG
EMISSIONS

USED FOR

Space heating,
domestic hot water
Natural gas and cooking.

Electricity

More information
Other

Where can I get more information ● Appendix A: Valuable terminology ●
Appendix B: Carbon in materials ● Appendix C: Environmental Product
Declarations ● References and acknowledgements
Materials

Ventilation, cooling,
lighting, pumps, small
power, lifts, security,
controls, and IT systems.

Emergency
(backup) power,
and refrigerants.

Emissions from
products, materials and
activities for repair,
maintenance and
refurbishment.

Manage peak and reduce net
building energy consumption
through energy efficiency
measures and effective demand
management controls.

Powered by renewables
Provide all electricity from 100%
renewable sources – on-site and/or
off-site.

Built with lower
upfront carbon
Significantly reduce upfront carbon
through material/product selection
during design and construction.

Offset with nature4
After reducing all other GHG
emissions as much as possible,
procure credible nature based offsets.

A practical guide to upfront carbon reductions

01

A practical guide to upfront carbon reductions

02

This guide

How to use
this guide

Everything you wanted to know about upfront carbon
(but were afraid to ask).
There are several terms and concepts that you should know about upfront
carbon, including its definition, calculation, and significance.
What are upfront
carbon emissions?

Upfront carbon emissions are produced during a building's
material production and construction activities before its use.

Is it different to
embodied carbon?

Embodied carbon includes upfront carbon, as well as modelled
assumptions for future potential carbon. Upfront carbon is a
tangible part of a building's embodied carbon, reflecting past
actions rather than future projections. There is higher certainty
when it comes to upfront carbon reductions than future
potential carbon reductions, hence the need to focus on it
during construction.

What defines
embodied carbon?

Embodied carbon includes upfront carbon (A1 to A5) and
emissions from the use and end-of-life stages of a building (B1
to B5 and C1 to C4, respectively). It is defined in the EN 15978
Standard5.

How much of a
problem is it?

Today, at least 25% of a typical building’s emissions occur
during the upfront carbon stage6 which cannot be changed
once the building is constructed as these emissions are already
spent. This percentage will increase as the grid decarbonises.

What can I do
about it?

To tackle upfront carbon, we need to build with less, reduce and
optimise virgin material usage, and use low-carbon materials
and construction technologies.

How hard is it
to reduce it?

Reducing upfront carbon is easiest during planning and earlystage design are where the largest reductions can be achieved
with the least effort. As construction begins, options become
more limited, and there is much less that can be done to reduce
upfront carbon once the building is operational apart from
upgrade or re-fit of elements.

How do I calculate it?

Figure 1. Embodied Carbon over the life of an asset adapted
from Embodied Carbon and Embodied Energy in Australia’s
Buildings (thinkstep-anz 2021)

Calculating upfront carbon involves determining the amount of
each material used in a building and multiplying it by the carbon
content per unit of use. Material databases provide generic
carbon information, whilst a product's Environmental Product
Declaration (EPD) can offer product specific carbon emissions.
Two main methods of calculation are comparison against a
fixed benchmark or a reference project. Calculating against a
reference requires defining both the reference and actual
buildings.

A practical guide to upfront carbon reductions

03

I heard that you can’t
trust calculations or
compare buildings?

Assumptions in upfront carbon calculations can vary in scope,
input data, and more. However, assuming the same conditions
and if reviewed by a third party, reduction calculations are
relevant. Documents such as GBCA’s Upfront Carbon Emissions
Calculation Guide help reduce variability in assumptions and
increase confidence in the calculation. Comparisons between
buildings are more difficult, but the guide above, and the
upcoming NABERS tool will make those more relevant.

Why not focus on
whole life carbon
or operating
emissions?

Historically, industry has focused on operational emissions. As we
decarbonise the grid, upfront carbon emissions during design and
construction become more impactful and cannot be reduced post
building completion. Early design also offers the opportunity to
maximise energy efficiency and reduce operating emissions.
Although it's essential to consider other emissions, doing so
should not come at the expense of upfront carbon or operations,
which are more easily influenced early on. Reducing other
embodied carbon emissions is also vital, but reducing upfront
emissions has a greater impact on a building's carbon footprint
today.

How is upfront
carbon addressed
by Green Star?

Green Star already has requirements for all projects to reduce
their upfront carbon to obtain a rating. Green Star uses a
reference building comparison for now but will switch to the
NABERS benchmarks once released.

A practical guide to upfront carbon reductions

04

The case for
reducing
upfront carbon

Climate change, health and wellbeing, natural resource
depletion, consumer preferences, investor demand - these are key
issues that are impacting how we develop or refurbish buildings in
our cities. Key to these challenges is how we transform our methods
of construction to reduce and eliminate our upfront carbon.
The built environment represents about 40% of all emissions
worldwide. Of those emissions7, 10% comes from construction
activities. In Australia8, that proportion is higher, with approximately
16% of all emissions generated from the built environment come
from product and materials used in the construction and
refurbishments of buildings, fitouts, and precincts.
At a building level, upfront carbon emissions6 from materials and
construction activities are around a quarter of a building’s lifetime
emissions. While currently a smaller proportion than a building’s
operating emissions, upfront emissions are spent on the day the
building opens – they can never be changed.
As we move into a decarbonised world, buildings with lower upfront
emissions are key to reducing our sector’s emissions. These
buildings are more attractive to investors as they demonstrate the
developer and builder are responsible entities. Upfront carbon
emissions are also being highlighted in sustainability reporting
frameworks and initiatives, as they are considered part of an entities
scope 3 emissions.
Lower upfront carbon emissions are also in the spotlight, as local,
state, and federal governments set targets to decarbonise the sector.
The NSW Government is introducing upfront carbon disclosure
requirements for residential and non-residential buildings as part of
their Sustainable Buildings SEPP9. Nationally, NABERS, in partnership
with GBCA, is developing a rating tool to benchmark and measure
upfront carbon in buildings10.
In the business case for lowering upfront carbon emissions, the
following factors can be considered:

Climate change: Reducing the impacts of the built environment
through decarbonising the sector. As operational carbon is
reduced through renewable electricity and energy efficiency
measures, embodied carbon emissions become the focus,
representing a larger proportion of total emissions 11.
Investor benefits: Investors are looking for assets with a clear
decarbonisation pathway. Lower upfront carbon buildings will
have access to sustainable finance (Green Bonds and Loans),
potentially at lower interest rates12. The rise of scope 3
reporting and its inclusion in corporate net zero targets means
that upfront carbon is no longer an optional consideration13.

Tenant and consumer preferences: Many organisations have
set goals for decarbonising assets that they own or lease. By
reporting on upfront emission reductions, organisations will be
better informed about the spaces they occupy.

A practical guide to upfront carbon reductions

05

International
and domestic
policies driving
upfront carbon
action

IEA’s zero carbon ready definition
In May 2021, the International Energy Agency released
‘Net Zero by 2050: A roadmap for the energy sector’14.
Within this report, the IEA set out its path for the building
sector - Zero-carbon-ready buildings. In addition to
zero‐carbon‐ready buildings being highly energy
efficient sourcing renewable energy using an energy
supply that will be fully decarbonised by 2050, the
IEA recognises Scope 3 emissions, those in modules
A1-A5 (the modules this guide addresses).
The IEA recommends buildings codes be adjusted to
target net-zero emissions from material use in buildings.

NSW Sustainable Buildings SEPP
In August 2022, the NSW Government announced the
Sustainable Buildings SEPP9. Taking effect from
October 2023, the new policy introduces sustainability
measures for non-residential buildings and improves the
standards for residential buildings under BASIX.
The policy requires calculation and reporting of
embodied emissions to set market signals and future
targets. The new SEPP adds a material index to the
current BASIX tool, building current data on materials
and, in the future, will move to rewarding homes that
use materials with lower embodied emissions.

City of Melbourne’s Zero Carbon
Buildings Plan
In October 2022, the City of Melbourne released its Zero
Carbon Buildings Plan15 aiming to drive policies to
deliver on their 2040 commitment. The plan defines
zero carbon buildings as buildings in which no
additional carbon is emitted into the environment
through the construction, operations and whole of life of
the building. It specifically calls out embodied energy
reductions within its goals. The final plan is expected to
be launched in the middle of 2023.

A practical guide to upfront carbon reductions

06

The investor
case for
reducing
upfront carbon

Market
solutions
driving change

Net zero asset owners alliance
Made up of institutional investors, the UN’s Net Zero
Asset Owner Alliance (NZAOA) is committed to
transition their investment portfolios to net-zero by 2050
(or consistent with a 1.5C maximum temperature rise).

Upfront carbon requirements in
Green Star
The Green Star Buildings tool (v1) has a dedicated
Upfront Carbon Emissions credit. The Reference Project
method is used to calculate reductions of the building
design. Any remaining upfront carbon emissions can be
compensated through nature-based offsets under the
‘Other Carbon Emission’ credit.

Specifically, members are tasked with engaging in
financial services regulation and economic policy
through climate policy engagement. Additionally,
members pledge to steward the assets they control
within their portfolio through corporate alignment due to
the perceived “obstructive climate policy engagement”
by investees which “can slow sectoral
……decarbonisation and the transition to net zero”. The
net zero asset owners alliance has called for scope 3
emissions to be considered16.

Projects seeking a rating under Green Star Buildings
must reduce upfront carbon by at least 10% (Minimum
Expectation). Those seeking higher ratings must
achieve at least a 20% reduction (Credit Achievement
worth 3 points). Requirements will increase in the future
to meet a 40% reduction (Exceptional Performance
worth an additional 3 points).
To help with the reference carbon calculations, GBCA
released an interim upfront carbon calculation guide1.
More information can be found in Green Star Buildings
Submission Guidelines.

Taskforce for climate related
financial disclosure (TCFD)
Created by the Financial Stability Board, the TCFD has
been charged with recommending the information
companies disclose to investors, insurance underwriters
and lenders to help them assess and price climate
related risks. TCFD guidance is now commonly used by
boards of real estate companies, and guidance is
expanding to note that scope 3 emissions are a key
material risk that needs to be addressed 17.

Climate Active Carbon Neutral
In 2022, Climate Active expanded its "Carbon Neutral
Standard for Products and Services" to provide
certification for reducing and offsetting the upfront
carbon emissions in new buildings and major
refurbishments19. The guideline covers the construction
stage, up to the point of delivery. Since its release,
groups like GPT have certified developments alongside
their Green Star ratings20.

Clean Energy Finance Corporation
As a major investor in Australia’s built environment, the
CEFC released “Opportunities for cutting embodied
carbon”18 in buildings and infrastructure.

NABERS Embodied Emissions

The paper lays out investors’ roles in decarbonisation,
including the importance of holding company directors
to account on their fiduciary requirements with regards
to climate change associated risks and to support
efforts in the decarbonisation of the supply and value
chain.

A practical guide to upfront carbon reductions

In partnership with the GBCA, NABERS is developing a
tool to measure, verify and compare upfront carbon in
new buildings10. This national tool will allow for the
creation of robust and measurable targets, increasing
the reliability of upfront carbon emissions reductions in
buildings. Doing so will enhance reporting to investors,
increase demand for low-carbon design practices and
construction materials, and create a common language
for embodied carbon emissions in Australia.

07

A practical guide to upfront carbon reductions

08

upfront carbon of a building per square metre can vary greatly
What is a typical The
depending on several factors, such as the building materials used, the size
and complexity of the building, and the location and climate. There are
building’s
studies that point to a range of expected emissions per square
upfront carbon? several
meter for multiple building types. These studies have been made across

Where is the
upfront
carbon?

various countries, including Australia, and all point to similar numbers. The
table below synthesizes them and aims to provide a reference.

kgCO2e/m2 GFA

In general, most of the building’s upfront carbon is in the superstructure
(suspended floors, structural walls, columns and beams), substructure
(foundations, basement retaining walls and ground slabs) and envelope.

Prioritising these elements during design and material choice yields the
highest opportunity to reduce upfront carbon.

10%

10%
Transport and
construction

Low

High

Mechanical
and electrical

Commercial

500

1000

10%

13%

Education
(primary and secondary)

200

500

Finishes and
fitout

Substructure

Education (tertiary)

750

1000

15%

42%

Health

700

900

Industrial

350

500

Figure 2: Typical breakdown of construction upfront carbon in a new office building 6

Multi-unit residential

600

800

Public building

500

800

The lifespan of different building elements also vary with the
superstructure and substructure being able to last the longest. By
maximising the lifespan of the most carbon intensive elements, this
reduces the need for replacement and additional upfront carbon
emissions associated with new construction.

Envelope (e.g.
façade and
roof)

Superstructure

Table 1: The estimates developed for this table should be considered indicative. The
values vary based on data sources, boundaries, scale, location and other factors. To
arrive at these figures, we considered the following studies:
Slattery (2022)6
ISTRUCTE (2022)21

Transportation
of Products
and Materials

Heavy transport vehicles have proven difficult to decarbonise to
date. However, the automotive industry has broadly started to
electrify heavy commercial vehicles that will assist the built
environment reducing the A4 module emissions for their projects.
In addition to reduced carbon emissions, there are obvious
benefits for developers and society with reduced air and noise
pollution from these vehicles25.

Construction
equipment
emissions

Construction machinery and equipment, typically fueled by fossil
fuels5 are also a source of upfront carbon in construction. Fossil
Free Construction requires the reduction of fossil fuels such as
diesel, petrol and LPG to power site office, construction
machinery and equipment. Electric Vehicles, and renewable fuels
such as diesel and biofuels are options currently accessible to the
sector as we move towards electrification.

CLF (2017)22
ARUP (2021)23
Built (2021)24

It's important to note that these estimates are just a rough guide, and that
the actual upfront carbon of a building will depend on a range of factors
that are specific to the project. These numbers cannot be used to define
reductions but can be used to test calculations against.
These estimates also do not account for any biogenic carbon, storage, or
offsets.

A practical guide to upfront carbon reductions

09

Published last year, Lendlease and University of Queensland's
report Stepping Up the Pace: Fossil Fuel Free Construction outlined
a roadmap for removing fossil fuels from construction sites 26.

A practical guide to upfront carbon reductions

10

How to measure
upfront carbon?

Upfront carbon for a building can be calculated by multiplying the
quantity of a specific product and its specific product emissions,
adding all product emissions together (modules A1 to A3), plus the
associated construction emissions (modules A4 to A5). The
calculation is not complex, once all information is available.

A more comprehensive calculation can be done through a life cycle
analysis (LCA) calculation. An LCA will provide more information than
just upfront carbon and may yield valuable insights and potential
opportunities for improving a building beyond upfront carbon
reductions.
For projects that use building information modelling (BIM) tools, plugins allow live assessment of design changes on upfront carbon
results. BIM can also be used to create ‘digital twins’ of buildings that
provide a repository or bank of materials data, including material
specification and emissions content.
Multiple data sources exist, and they can be divided into processbased LCA, top-down LCA, or hybrid LCA.
Process-based (LCA) evaluates products by analysing all aspects of
the manufacturing, as far as practicable – it is specific, and targeted,
but can have data limitations. Top-down LCA estimates impacts by
allocating the total environmental burden of a product class (e.g.
concrete) – it is comprehensive, but conservative and broad. Hybrid
LCA combines both to give more targeted information, but still
delivers generic information (e.g. specific concrete grades).
There are many databases where you can find this information5.
When doing calculations, it is important to use aligned data sources
to ensure comparability between results.

Measuring
reductions in
upfront carbon

The two accepted methods to calculate upfront carbon are:
Comparison against a Fixed Benchmark
Comparison against a Reference Project
The fixed benchmark approach uses a direct comparison of a
Proposed Project’s upfront carbon rate against a benchmark relevant
to the building’s scale and function.
Under the Reference Project method, two upfront carbon calculations
are compared; a Reference Project and a Proposed Project. The
Proposed Project represents the current building design while the
Reference Project is a hypothetical project that is similar in shape,
scale, function and location but based on standard construction
practices without attention to upfront carbon reduction.
GBCA, with assistance from NABERS, has released a guide for
calculating upfront carbon emissions reductions against a reference
building. This guide:
Outlines the scope of inclusions and exclusions in an upfront
carbon calculation
Provides options for reducing upfront carbon emissions
Defines default Reference Project’s materials

Although there is no industry-agreed fixed benchmark available in
Australia – only a potential range of emissions as noted on the
previous page -- the NABERS Embodied Emissions project is expected
to provide them. Until then, the interim guide provides the best
guidance available for Australia for comparing reductions against a
Reference Project.

Top-down

Process

The typical sources of information are:
Product specific EPD

A verified and standardised document, compliant with ISO14025, that provides transparent information on a product’s lifecycle carbon footprint,
water consumption, energy use, and other relevant impacts. Appendix C provides more information.

Industry specific EPD

As above, but for a class of products from multiple manufacturers. It should be noted that this EPD only applies to the products and participants
listed within. Because it is for multiple manufacturers, it reflects an average, so some products may have higher emissions.

Generic material data

Delivered from process-based or hybrid-LCA studies, this dataset provides generic information on products such as generic concrete mixes.
Australia’s EPIC Database is an example of one.

Literature data

Derived from information from top-down LCA studies, this provides information on the product class, which might be useful when the product
selection is unknown.

A practical guide to upfront carbon reductions

11

A practical guide to upfront carbon reductions

12

Reducing carbon at each
stage of the process

Stage

Feasibility &
Brief

Addressing upfront carbon emissions from the earliest stages of a project allows for the implementation of effective strategies that reduce the overall
environmental impact. Calculating upfront carbon is something that should be done multiple times during the development of the project. Doing so
allows progress to be compared against targets.

Potential
reduction

Calculation
certainty

100%

Lowest

Options available

Things to consider

Data used

Re-use an existing building, or maximise the reuse
of existing building components, with a focus on
retaining structure and envelopes.

Identify components with the highest carbon
contribution, likely in the substructure,
superstructure and envelope and major services.
Answer the key question: How much new space is
needed?

Calculations are likely to use more generic material data,
as specific materials will not be selected yet. Future
calculations can be compared against this stage, but be
careful that the emissions reductions aren't occurring
due to changing data sources.

For new buildings, adopt low-carbon design
approaches in material selection and design
options.

Design

Optimise the shape and design of the building,
reduce the quantity of materials, and increase
modularity and future adaptability.

This stage offers an opportunity to reduce
complexity in the design and save carbon.
Consider the shape and volume of the new
building, and specify low carbon materials.

As the design is refined, calculations should be updated
regularly to reflect changes.

Tender

Look for opportunities to reduce the carbon in the
structure and envelope. Seek innovative solutions
in the tender with a focus on low-carbon
materials. Ask specifically for the tender response
to calculate carbon alongside the price.
Collaborate with suppliers and contractors to
further reduce the project's carbon footprint
throughout the supply chain.

Set out clear guidelines for contractors to respond
to in the calculations, as depending on how the
calculate, they may get a lower result without
providing a benefit.

The calculations should require product-specific EPDs
where known, with industry-wide EPDs or robust general
databases to supplement them. Where possible this
information should be included within the BIM model for
the project.

The implementation of efficient construction
practices, such as just-in-time delivery, use of lowcarbon construction equipment and renewable
fuels, contributes to lowering the project's carbon
emissions. This is also a key time to ensure
transport and construction process emissions are
monitored and reduced. The construction stage
offers the opportunity to reduce fossil fuel use onsite.

With targets set, continue reviewing during
construction. As suppliers are selected and
product-specific EPDs are sourced (where
available), update the calculation. This process
should be repeated when any changes occur to
monitor and confirm alignment with reduction
targets.

There should be bills of quantities for all materials at
this stage and a robust upfront carbon calculation that
should be able to be confirmed against targets.

Whilst handover marks the end of the project,
strategies such as design for disassembly or
reuse will help reduce the upfront carbon of future
refurbishment or maintenance projects.

The builder should collect all final quantities and
EPD information and make them available for final
documentation.

At this point, a final calculation is done, and reviewed
against targets.

Construction

Handover

0%

Highest

A practical guide to upfront carbon reductions

13

There are still opportunities to reduce carbon in
materials, future construction practices, and
options for suppliers and contractors to offer
innovative solutions.

The BIM model should continue to be updated.

A practical guide to upfront carbon reductions

14

Developing
upfront carbon
targets

The first step is for you to set out your targets. This is an iterative
process, and the earlier you start, the higher the potential for
reductions.

What reduction
targets should
you aim for?
10%

Calculate the upfront carbon of
the Reference Project

Build less
Reuse
Dematerialise
Specify low-carbon
materials

A 10% reduction is generally achievable with the use of low
carbon materials and is minimal to cost neutral.
This level of reduction is the minimum reduction that must be
achieved be all projects targeting Green Star Buildings
certification27.

Identify initiatives and
opportunities for reduction

20%

Quantify reduction through
upfront carbon calculations

A 20% reduction will require most than just substituting
materials for a low carbon option. More collaboration is needed
between stakeholders to dematerialise the building through
design optimisation and the reuse of existing buildings will be
needed.

Assess cost implications and
define a preferred design

From 2026 onwards, all buildings that target Green Star
Buildings will be required to reach this reduction target.

40%

Outline enablers and address
barriers to implementation

ARE TARGETS MET?

A 40% reduction is ambitious but achievable. Building on the
above, this reduction can be achieved by reusing existing
buildings or by using reused components or low carbon
materials are part of all new building elements.
By 2030, all Green Star buildings should demonstrate this
reduction, making high upfront carbon reductions standard
practice in the built environment.

NO

YES

Legend

Embed the upfront carbon
reduction pathway in design

A practical guide to upfront carbon reductions

Standard
building

15

Proposed

A practical guide to upfront carbon reductions

16

Getting to
zero upfront
carbon today

Decarbonising the built environment requires reducing upfront carbon
and compensating for any remaining emissions.

Roles in the
project lifecycle

The below stakeholders have important roles to play in reducing
upfront carbon through the lifecycle of a project. The graphic on
the next page outlines these roles in more detail.

Reduce as far as practicable, then compensate
According to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC),
limiting global warming to 1.5°C requires rapid and far-reaching
reductions in emissions, while at the same time, noting the
importance of addressing remaining emissions through carbonremoval activities28.

Investors

Invest in buildings with improved lifespans through refurbishment
and reuse, and that deliver credible reductions in upfront carbon.

Developers

Increase utilisation of existing buildings through refurbishment
and reuse, avoiding demolition. Rethink the size and shape of new
buildings. Promote the use of different materials.

Authorities

Require all developments subject to planning approval to measure
and report upfront carbon. Adopt recognised performance
standards to set reduction targets. Ensure standard
specifications feature low carbon options.

Professional
Services

Help define the brief to deliver upfront carbon reductions.
Work collaboratively to design and specify low upfront carbon
buildings. Advocate for net zero buildings.

Builders &
Trades

Facilitate supply chain transformation in collaboration with
trades. Track and report upfront carbon. Have an action plan to
reduce upfront carbon.

Leasing
Agents

Advocate for low upfront carbon buildings with the developer,
prospective tenants and occupants, and purchasers. Demonstrate
benefits.

According to the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors (RICS)
Whole of Life Carbon Standard30, it is best practice to keep reduction
calculations separate from compensation calculations. This
approach ensures that efforts to reduce emissions are not conflated
– while the carbon balance account is maintained, both actions serve
distinct purposes.

Tenants &
Occupants

Choose to lease or occupy refurbished and reused buildings, and
buildings that demonstrate a credible reduction in upfront carbon.

Both reduction and compensation strategies are essential in
addressing upfront carbon emissions in buildings. While reduction is
the primary objective, compensation through biogenic carbon and
carbon offsets plays a vital role in taking responsibility for remaining
emissions. It is crucial to keep these strategies separate in order to
accurately track progress and maintain transparency.

Owners

The Science Based Targets Initiative (SBTi) emphasizes the reduction
aspect as well prior to compensation activities. The Corporate NetZero Standard29 emphasises that companies must prioritise reducing
emissions within their own operations and value chains. Offsetting
and compensation activities, such as carbon offsets and biogenic
carbon, can be used to address residual emissions, but these must
be separated from reduction efforts.
At this point, it is not likely that a building can reduce its upfront
carbon emissions to zero without compensation activities like
biogenic carbon and carbon offsets.

The role of biogenic carbon and offsetting
Biogenic carbon refers to the carbon absorbed and released by living
organisms, such as trees. For products like timber, this carbon can be
considered stored on site, in the building. Carbon offsetting is a
method of compensating for emissions by funding projects that
remove emissions from the atmosphere A.
Biogenic carbon and carbon offsets are related in that they both
contribute to the overall balance of carbon in the atmosphere. They
can be considered a form of compensation for upfront emissions.

Keeping track of your emissions

A. Carbon offsets for abatement
activities are not advised;
instead, it is recommended to
use high-quality carbon removal
offsets, with a preference for
nature-based solutions. GBCA
published guidance on why
nature-based offsets, and the
Property Council of Australia
further released an assurance
framework to guarantee the
delivery of high-quality offsets.

A practical guide to upfront carbon reductions

17

Promote benefits of low upfront carbon buildings and seek to
own buildings that have been refurbished and reused, and are low
upfront carbon buildings.

A practical guide to upfront carbon reductions

18

The lifecycle of the
project in one page
Feasibility

Brief

Design

Tender

Construction

Handover

Prevent

Set a vision for upfront carbon
reduction for your organisation

Introduce upfront carbon targets into
your site feasibility studies
Where possible, select sites with suitable
ground conditions that require no/minimal
demolition or can reuse existing buildings,
avoiding new construction

Reduce & Optimise

Develop a brief with clear targets and
expectations for your development
and site
Develop design options against targets,
and quantify potential further
reductions
Select a preferred option seeking
further analysis to look for more
reductions
Optimise further by streamlining
components and using low carbon
materials

Deliver

Deliver a plan for lean construction
and deconstruction, rules for
substitutions and waste reduction
Electrify site construction vehicles
and offices. Utilise Heavy Duty EVs
for transport of products and
materials to site
Record materials, transportation,
on-site energy, water, waste, and
collect EPDs

Encourage

Complete the construction stage
calculations to confirm performance

Require low upfront carbon buildings
and fitouts in your leasing practices

A practical guide to upfront carbon reductions

19

A practical guide to upfront carbon reductions

20

Feasibility

Brief

Feasibility is critical as the decisions and targets related to
upfront carbon are decided here.

A finalised brief sets the objectives for the project’s deliverables and
clarifies the roles of the project team. This is a vital for setting clear
goals through to construction.

Stakeholders

Questions

Stakeholders

Can the project be avoided?

Questions

Can the project reuse any or all of an existing building?

How to identify further opportunities through the lifecycle?

What are the project’s targets for upfront carbon reduction?

How does the team manage change as more details become
clear through the project?

What can be done to get there?

Opportunities

Eliminate the need for development

Opportunities

Prefer sites with buildings that can be reused to avoid
demolition and new construction

Challenge the brief: are there any further
opportunities for reducing carbon?
Does the brief encourage innovation? Invite
recommendations for practices or technology from
the team’s experience.

Avoid sites with complex ground conditions

Deliverables

How to ensure practices to reuse building elements?

A Vision Statement for the project, highlighting ambitions
including upfront carbon

Deliverables

A performance brief with measurable upfront carbon
reduction targets for the project

A design brief with a whole of building, measurable upfront
carbon target that includes:
The boundary or scope of the target

Identification of options to retain or reuse existing assets

What is included and what is excluded

Feasibility recommendations with measurable upfront
carbon reduction targets (against a Reference Project or
similar), recommendations for reuse (where possible)

The data and/or methodology used to establish the target

A description of the main assumptions used to establish
the Reference Project

Ambition for a performance based brief to enable
substitutions for products or materials that have the same
outcomes

Schedule of pre-approved materials, products, and assemblies
Budget for processes, products and materials

Communication strategy to ensure these ambitions are
shared throughout the project lifecycle

Where demolition can’t be avoided, develop a circular
deconstruction strategy that identifies options for material
recovery and reuse in the project or for use off site.

Budget for the inclusion of low embodied carbon materials
and products
Identity innovation opportunities

Before the next
stage you
should:

Before the next
stage you
should:

Complete a ‘hot spot’ upfront carbon analysis for the
design brief. This will assist in identifying where
initiatives will realise the most valuable reductions in
upfront carbon and underpin preparation of an
upfront carbon reduction pathway.

A practical guide to upfront carbon reductions

21

Complete a whole building life cycle assessment.

A practical guide to upfront carbon reductions

22

Comparing
strategies to
reduce and
compensate
upfront carbon
emissions

From retaining an asset to building a new one, the opportunities to
reduce upfront carbon emissions vary based on your chosen strategy.
To the right is an indicative comparison available per strategy chosen.
In all cases, specific site conditions will vary, and consultant advice
should be sought.
In general, the best strategies for eliminating or reducing upfront
carbon emissions will prefer the retention or reuse of existing assets.
Reusing a building instead of demolishing and replacing it offers the
maximum guaranteed emissions savings. Refurbishment is also
typically quicker than new construction so there are financial savings
from this strategy as well.
For new buildings, and all other options, design optimisation
strategies and material selection will yield a 40% to 75% reduction of
whatever remaining carbon exists (depending which building
components are reused or refurbished). The remaining emissions will
need to be compensated. As yet, it is not possible to have a new zero
upfront emissions building.

Potential impact of upfront carbon emissions strategies

0%

100%

Retain assets & minor refit

Reuse structure and
envelope
Reuse structure

Keep structure and extend

Demolish and re-build*

Rewarding reuse strategies in
Green Star Buildings

New asset

Green Star Buildings was redesigned to better reward
reusing buildings, reused building components, and
reused products, particularly when the building is fully
electric and powered by renewables.
For example, assets where the structure and
envelope are retained, and where they are refurbished
to be all-electric can achieve enough points to get to
a 5-star rating, provided they meet the other
minimum expectations.

* Demolishing a building

carries with it a carbon
debt from the
embedded carbon in
the previous building
that should be
considered and offset.

Emissions savings compared to a typical new building from:
Reuse of existing building
Potential emissions savings from:
Design optimisation

Fossil-fuel free construction

Material selection
Remaining emissions that must be compensated via:
Biogenic storage or nature based offsets

A practical guide to upfront carbon reductions

23

A practical guide to upfront carbon reductions

24

Concept Design

Detailed Design

The early design stage allows assumptions to be tested and options to be
worked through. The preferred concept will be one that meets the brief
requirements and upfront carbon targets the best.

At this stage, there is a greater amount of information available about the
design, enabling more accurate modelling and testing of assumptions from
earlier stages.

Stakeholders

Questions

Stakeholders

Rationalise the design:

Questions

Where in the build are opportunities for dematerialisation?

How can we integrate reused or standardised elements?

Optimise the design:

What are opportunities to design for disassembly?

How can we integrate reused or standardised elements?

Where are opportunities for low carbon finishes, fittings and
furniture?

How can low carbon design initiatives be integrated into the
concept?

What are opportunities to design for disassembly?

Opportunities

Opportunities

Integrate existing buildings / elements into the design

More detailed understanding of opportunities for innovation
within the build

Reduce and/or even eliminate transfer structures
Optimise the structural grid for low carbon materials

Focus on material selection and specify low carbon. (See
Appendix B)

Minimise substructure

Challenge design margins

Deliverables

Reference Project

Updated carbon reduction pathway

Alternative design options with measured upfront carbon
impacts

Confirmed targets are deliverable

Upfront carbon roadmap

Collaborated with consultants and contractors to ensure bill of
quantities are accurate and contingency ordering is minimised

Finalised scheme assessed, with upfront carbon calculated

Design stage upfront carbon calculation

Before the next
stage you
should:

Fine tuning of carbon reduction with more finalised
information
Alignment with the project team with targets communicated
and monitored

Align load bearing structural elements

Deliverables

Where in the build are opportunities for dematerialisation?

Identify if there is a possibility to standardise
building elements, and design for disassembly.

Before the next
stage you
should:

Identify material banks for components which could
be reused as part of the deconstruction strategy.

A practical guide to upfront carbon reductions

25

Finalise bill of quantities including performance
specifications and reduced contingencies for materials

AApractical
practicalguide
guideto
toupfront
upfrontcarbon
carbonreductions
reductions

26

Design considerations in reducing a project’s upfront carbon
Stage

Initiative

Feasibility

Retain existing building

Brief

Concept
design

Detailed
design

Consideration

Reduce number of floors whilst
maintaining the building’s height

Reduce structural grid

Cost impact

Temporary support and/or structural strengthening may be needed during repair work adding some
upfront carbon.
Fewer floors may result in less material quantity however taller structures can require larger vertical
support elements.

Potential upfront
carbon reduction

V

+++

$$

++

$

++

Larger mullions and wall studs and thicker panels may be needed to cover the larger vertical spans.
Larger amount of columns may impact a floor’s spatial flow.

Important to optimise columns, beams, and floor sizes to ensure total upfront carbon is lower

Reconsider basement levels

Impacts to lettable area may occur as services and amenities may need to be relocated.

$$

++

Use a braced steel frame rather than a
moment frame

A braced steel frame may impact on views and daylight if not considered in the design.

$

+

Consider timber for the superstructure.
Where timber is used, ensure it carries a
certified chain of custody.

Use of timber may result in reduced floor to ceiling height and/or number of storeys, as well as
reduced floor space due to larger columns being needed.

$$

++

Switch to higher grade strength steel to
reduce steel quantity

Higher strength steel does not always lead to smaller member sizes therefore the total upfront carbon
may not be reduced – make sure to optimise.

$$

+

Switch to lower grade strength concrete
to reduce Portland cement

Larger volumes of concrete may be required with a lower grade mix for structural strength and
durability purposes and may result in larger supporting structural elements and higher upfront carbon
overall.

$

+

$$

+++

$$

+

$$

++

Increase percentage of Substitute
Cementitious Materials in concrete

Increase wall to window ratio to reduce
aluminium framing

Increase recycled content in glazing

The concrete may take longer to cure impacting construction timelines.

The concrete colour may be different.
If the aluminium has recycled content, smaller glazing panels may yield less upfront carbon.
Improved thermal performance and lower operational energy demand.
Reduced views and daylight.
Potential for lower aesthetic quality.
Legend

A practical guide to upfront carbon reductions

27

$

< 5% in savings

+

Low impact

$

< 5% in cost

++

Medium impact

$$

5% to 15% in cost

+++

High impact

V

Depends on circumstance

A practical guide to upfront carbon reductions

28

Tender
The tender, and its return, are the point where all requirements are finalised and
communicated prior to being costed for construction

Specifications

Stakeholders

Questions

Specifications should include language that requires the builder to
submit EPDs for all components considered and tracked for upfront
carbon reduction. The EPDs should cover, at a minimum, the life cycle
product stage, or modules A1-A3. Specifications should also call for the
Contractor to submit a bill of quantities (BOQ) that provides
products/materials itemised by application and type. The global
warming potential (GWP), or carbon content, for each item, based on
EPDs, should also be included.

DEVELOPER:
How can we embed the carbon reduction requirements for
the project?
How can we evaluate tenders i.e.. weighting for carbon
reduction?

Digital Solutions

BUILDER:

Underpinning the specifications, an advanced building information
model (BIM) should be provided. To support an effective knowledge
transfer to the builder, it should:

Can further reductions be made?
Are there other materials or processes to assist?
Can the brief be challenged further?

Opportunities

Label all new components and all relevant components that will be
reused from an existing asset

At this stage, project teams should challenge the brief for any
further opportunities to reduce carbon

Does the brief encourage innovation? Invite
recommendations for practices or technology from the
team’s experience

Deliverables

Facilitate BOQ extraction in a range of formats
Detail GWP targets or ranges for all component types

Tender Evaluations

Finalised documentation
Detailed performance specifications including metrics and
obligations for reporting
Specified carbon metrics for products
Expand the digital BIM environment to access material banks
and map components for reuse
Allow for seamless iterations with tendering builders to test
and evaluate further optimisations

The tendering builders should understand the established brief
requirements, i.e., the functional brief requirements of the project and
its upfront carbon reduction target. The specifications should provide
room for the builders to innovate but be clearly performance based so
that tenderers can make changes to materials or processes if the
agreed metrics are met or exceeded. Builders work extensively with
the trades and supply chain, are in a unique position to further
optimise for upfront carbon reductions. The tender process should be
designed to facilitate this interaction and incentivise improvement
performance.

Builder to develop a Construction Sustainability Report

Before the next
stage you
should:

Align project team with the vision for the project

Set out which metrics will be monitored and tracked, and how

A practical guide to upfront carbon reductions

29

A practical guide to upfront carbon reductions

30

Construction
Once on site, it is important to ensure that monitoring and measurement is in
place and that any variations to the design are checked with the principal for
performance before substitutions are made.

Reconcile upfront carbon reduction performance against the
upfront carbon roadmap - review and compare BOQs, EPDs, etc.

How to track, monitor and report on agreed metrics?

Demand detailed environmental information from suppliers as
standard to support comparative evaluation and selection, perform
due diligence to ensure final products are as ordered or have the
same properties, especially in respect to their embodied carbon.

What is the process for product substitution to ensure
targets are met?

Can I reduce the carbon emissions from all construction
activities by switching to renewables or fossil-fuel-free
equipment?

Opportunities

Deliverables

At this stage, the builder has the responsibility to deliver on the upfront
carbon targets set by the principal. To deliver reductions, the builder
must:
Demonstrate capabilities, experience and strategies related to
upfront carbon reporting and reduction and provide input on cost
and program.

Stakeholders

Questions

Builder Responsibilities

Procure renewable energy for site offices, and use low-carbon fuels
or all electric equipment to reduce upfront carbon during
construction activities. Also work with suppliers to reduce
emissions from transport (See Appendix B).

Access material banks for disassembled components for
reuse and deposit into these banks with any resources that
are surplus to requirements

Construction Sustainability Report

Use fossil-fuel free equipment, and renewable energy onsite26

The construction sustainability report covers construction to
handover. The plan should be used as a measuring and
management tool to ensure lean construction, material reuse, and
waste reduction management.

Construction Sustainability Report

Estimation of the embodied carbon should be on a regular basis in
order to understand how design and material selection affect the
ultimate outcome. The number and timing of iterations must be
agreed upon with the embodied carbon assessor.

Induction workshop to align key suppliers/contractors with
the roles, objectives and targets to reduce upfront carbon.
Record of materials and transportation

Construction-related upfront carbon reporting for the plan should
be in appropriate units (e.g., kgCO2e) and be reported regularly,
with a final summary document provided at handover. Regular
reporting is often important for Construction (A5) emissions so
consider frequent, or monthly reporting, as needed.

On-site energy consumption reporting

EPDs for all relevant products
Develop a detailed and comprehensive repository of data
across the trades and supply chain that offers advanced
reduction strategies

The construction sustainability report should include the upfront
carbon estimates for any temporary works materials, on-site
construction emissions, and materials waste. It should promote the
integration of temporary works materials into permanent works or
demonstrate reuse strategies to extend the life of these materials.

Put forward advanced strategies that significantly improve
reductions, and qualify the triple bottom line business case
for their adoption
Access material banks for disassembled components for
reuse and deposit into these banks any resources that are
surplus to requirements

A practical guide to upfront carbon reductions

31

A practical guide to upfront carbon reductions

32

Handover
Once on site, it is important to ensure that monitoring and measurement is in
place and that any variations to the design are checked with the principal for
performance before substitutions are made.

Lessons Learned – Closing the
Feedback loop

Stakeholders

Questions

At project handover, the as-built upfront carbon calculations and BOQ
can be compared with the construction and design stage calculations
and BOQs.

How to capture outcomes?
How to improve performance in future?

Opportunities

Lessons learned

Set standard upfront carbon reduction targets/benchmarks
and identify opportunities for more ambitious reductions
Demonstrate a strong correlation in design, construction and
as-built performance

Deliverables

By monitoring these impacts, the developer can make informed
decisions throughout design and construction - allowing the
opportunity for a general downward trend in upfront carbon. By
reviewing these impacts at handover and cataloguing lessons learnt,
the developer and other stakeholders can perpetuate reductions on
future projects.

Finalised construction carbon plan
Final As-Built BOQ and compiled EPDs
As-built upfront carbon calculations
Building User’s Guide and Building Logbook with upfront
carbon targets and reduction strategies

A practical guide to upfront carbon reductions

Upfront carbon may increase or decrease throughout the project,
depending on several factors. For example, a decrease may be
observed when an alternate bid is selected to reduce carbon. Inversely,
an increase may be observed during construction if a higher strength
concrete mix is used due to availability. Another example is a change
in GFA at time of completion. Under the Green Star Upfront Carbon
Emission credit, this will affect the final reported upfront carbon
emissions with declared units kgCO 2e/m2GFA.

The GBCA encourages the sharing of best practices and lessons
learned to promote cross-industry knowledge transfer and improve the
overall success of future projects.

33

A practical guide to upfront carbon reductions

34

Case Study:
25 King Street
Building typology
High-rise, multi-storey
Location
Brisbane, QLD
Sector
Commercial
Developer
Lendlease

Builder
Lendlease
Procurement
Design & Construct
Key Influences

Key outcomes
CLT and Glulam
structure and finishes
Average 40% Portland
cement reduction

At 52 metres tall and 14,965 m2 of office NLA spread across 10 floors, 25
King Street is Australia’s largest commercial office building constructed
with Cross Laminated Timber (CLT) and glue laminated timber (Glulam).
As part of the $2.9 billion renewal of the Brisbane Showgrounds in Bowen
Hills QLD, the project sits within one of Australia’s biggest urban renewal
initiatives. Now home to its engineering team Aurecon, it holds many
sustainability ratings including a 6 star Green Star Design and As-Built
rating, NABERS 6 star office energy, 4.5 star water and 3.5 waste ratings
and Carbon Neutral certification for base building and a Platinum WELL
Shell and Core rating.
The project team wanted a building that would visibly express
sustainability and engineering. Since concept stage, upfront carbon
emissions and decision to build with timber was established.

25 King Street reduced upfront carbon within Modules A1
–A3 by 38.7% when compared to a reference building
The key upfront carbon reduction design initiatives at 25 King Street
included:

Image credit: Lendlease

Engineered timber was used in lieu of carbon intensive concrete and
steel for structural columns and beams
Minimalist internal finishes with CLT cladding and flooring with no
suspended ceilings systems throughout
40% reduction in overall Portland Cement use
A Life Cycle Inventory was established from the building cost plan,
preliminary bill of quantities and site construction bill of materials, as well
as drawings, specifications, environmental product declarations and the
like, using the GaBi Professional + Extension Database. The scope for
upfront carbon was Modules A1 to A3.

The Reference Project comprised of a standard concrete/steel
construction, while the Proposed Project was of a Cross Laminated
Timber (CLT) and Glulam structure. The structural design of the two
cases is consistent, using a post and beam construction, however the
physical quantities of structural materials (concrete and steel compared
with CLT and Glulam) vary between the Reference Project and the Design
Case. These quantities of structural materials have been determined for
both the Reference and Design Cases by engineering and cost planning
experts and the bill of quantities. Where data was unavailable, the study
uses estimated inputs based on similar projects.
The focus on sustainability within design attracts more and higher quality
tenants and lower vacancy risk. 25 King Street offers high-end office
space with strong lease covenants. Its tenants, as reported by IIG, have
been attracted by 25 King’s amenity, innovation and overall quality,
including the extensive use of engineered timber to drive environmental
performance.

A practical guide to upfront carbon reductions

35

25 King has set a new benchmark for
sustainability, occupant wellbeing and
building performance. A low carbon,
low waste and highly energy efficient
building that also puts health and
wellbeing at the heart of its design.
ANN AUSTIN | Head of Sustainability – Australia, Lendlease

A practical guide to upfront carbon reductions

36

Case Study:
Substation No.
164

Sub Station No.164 featured the adaptive reuse of two heritage
buildings, incorporating a striking steel and glass ‘bubble’ structure
which appears to float above. The building offers 7,867 m2 of Agrade office space.

Building typology
High-rise, multi-storey

The heritage part of the building was a 110-year-old timber and
brick structure had been occupied by the Norman Shelley Spirit
Warehouse and a DC Electrical Substation, built in 1909 and 1930
respectively. Built took on the challenge of upgrading and retaining
and reusing as much of the buildings’ original material as possible.
As a result, the project’s upfront carbon footprint reduced by 21%.

Location
Sydney, NSW
Sector
Commercial
Developer
Built and Nuveen
Builder
Built
Procurement
Early Contractor
Involvement/
Design & Construct

"By retaining as much of the building’s
heritage as we could, and by using low
carbon materials, we created an iconic
building, restored a part of Sydney's
history, and drove significant upfront
carbon savings - a win for everyone.”
Brett Mason, Managing Director & CEO, Built

Key Influences

Substantial retention of the existing brick façades, walls, floors and
columns. The reuse of existing timber floors in the warehouse as
formwork for the concrete floor slabs required to meet current fire
codes, contributed not only to structural efficiency, it also
significantly improved upfront carbon efficiency.

Many of the original heritage components, such as brick and
timber, were retained and incorporated into the final design.
Applying the concept of dematerialisation by using the existing
building fabric such as exposed concrete, bricks and up-cycling
timber flooring reclaimed from the site as key design aesthetics
conserved resources by minimising use of virgin materials.

Existing timber flooring removed to make space for the new lift
core was retained and repurposed as wall paneling in Built’s head
office, reinforcing the qualities of the existing heritage building
fabric and finding a new use for existing materials.

During construction, the site used 100% GreenPower onsite,
processes which further improved the carbon outcomes of the
project.
Reference Project Definition
A reference case was based on the initial measurement of the project
that was developed for a cost plan, and additional measurements taken
by the engineers to calculate the materials that would be required if a
new structure were built rather than retaining the existing heritage
buildings.

A practical guide to upfront carbon reductions

37

The key innovations allowing such a substantial upfront carbon
reduction included:

Key Outcomes
Retained
structure and
materials.
Average 44%
Portland
cement
reduction

An integrated design process between the design team and Built's
design managers and structural engineer consultant.
Structural efficiencies were found that enabled the deletion of a
main column and reductions in structural walls – reducing
concrete and steel quantities in the build.

Concrete mixes with an average 44% cement replacement were
used.

A practical guide to upfront carbon reductions

38

In total, more than half the construction
material budget was for materials
manufactured and / or assembled in
Victoria. More than two-thirds of the
materials budget was spent in
Australia.

In the design phase, the project
adopted the mindset of “adaptive
reuse and appropriate durability”
Case Study:
Burwood
Brickworks
Building typology
Low-rise
Location
Burwood, VIC

Sector
Retail
Developer
Frasers Property

Builder
Hacer Group
Procurement
Design & Construct

The project team improved upfront carbon outcomes through use of
lower-strength concrete where feasible, limiting carbon-intensive
materials, opting for carbon sequestering materials, reviewing EPDs,
incorporating a significant number of salvaged materials, using highrecycled content materials, using structural materials as the final finish,
and minimising waste.

Key Influences

Natural “honest” finishes were prioritised, which helped to avoid
superfluous coatings that make items more bespoke and less likely to
be salvageable in the future. In turn, these materials can better retain
value, making them more feasible for reuse and recycling. In electrical
items, plug-in devices were preferred over hardwiring to avoid reengineering controls and entire systems for small future changes.

In the design phase, the project adopted the mindset of “adaptive reuse
and appropriate durability”. Given the retail typology, the project team
focused on both the potential flexibility and disassembly of the base
building, and guided tenants to undertake their fitout designs with
regard to material/product selection, and accessible installation
approaches to allow easier maintenance and deconstruction.
Additional systems and services were reduced in the first instance
through passive design, e.g. maintaining daylight via the layout, and
prioritising modular components across standard structural grids.
High-traffic components were clearly designated from others and this
differential wear and tear was considered in the design.
Clear spans in the supermarket, mall, cinema, and regularly spaced
structural elements across the structural grid allow for multiple
alternate uses of the interior in the future without costly structural
alterations. Generous floor-to-floor heights are to be allowed
throughout the mall and the tenancies on both levels, helpful for
daylighting, natural ventilation, and adding or upgrading building
services.

A practical guide to upfront carbon reductions

39

Flat floors with very few transitions from one floor height to another
were ensured throughout, to allow more flexibility when renovating or
change of use. Structural layouts across shopfronts allow flexibility
across the interior openings, and intertenancy walls can be readily
moved without heavily wasteful demolition.

Key Outcomes
Reduced Portland
cement mixes,
low carbon
materials,
recycled and
repurposed
materials

Through the construction phase of the project, the contractors had to
commit to reducing environmental burdens from the extraction,
processing, and disposal of materials. Subcontractors were
encouraged to remove excessive packaging from products, where
possible, prior to arrival on site.
Over-ordering was utilised as spare product were retained by the
subcontractor for use on future projects. In the installation
methodology repeatable mechanical (rather than toxic chemical)
connections were made, which allows easier maintenance as well as
deconstruction, and leaves labelling in place for easier reassembly in
the components’ next life.
Considering the end-of-life phase, the project team focused on
adaptability and deconstruction to allow for multiple alternate uses of
the interior in the future designing flexible building services, whilst
providing equity of access without costly structural alteration.

A practical guide to upfront carbon reductions

40

Case Study:
Quay Quarter
Tower
Building typology
High-rise, multi-storey
Location
Sydney, NSW
Sector
Commercial Office
Developer
AMP Capital
Builder
Multiplex
Procurement
Design & Construct
Key Influences

Key outcomes
Reuse of existing
structure

The 46-storey, 188m tall AMP Centre was originally designed by
Peddle Thorp & Walker and constructed in 1972. It is fronted by
the AMP building featuring the American-inspired curved glass
curtain wall- “Sydney’s front door” providing a landmark entry
to the city from the north and from the Harbour. The site is of
historical and aesthetic significance as the first “skyscraper”
in Sydney.
Due to aging and inefficient mechanical services and leaking
façade, the site underwent master planning in 2013 with options
to redevelop this building with the agenda of adaptive reuse
being key to its success. A key strategy arising from AMP
Capital and the design team’s feasibility studies was the
retention of 65% of the existing structure (existing columns,
beams and slabs) and 95% of its original core.
To enable the twisting angular design by 3XN – a series of
stacked ‘vertical villages’ designed around atria – floorplates
were extended in different directions to create large open-plan
spaces. The façade engineers in conjunction with the architects
devised the facade shading strategy which folds and tapers
following the sun as it moves from east to west minimising glare
to support the twisting aesthetic while enhancing views towards
the Opera House and the harbour.
The Life Cycle Assessment conducted by the team
demonstrated a saving of over 12,000 tonnes of CO2e- of
upfront carbon emissions from the reuse of concrete alone
compared to a Reference Project. The structural carbon
footprint of the building was estimated at 247 Kg CO 2/m2 gross
internal area. This is in contrast to 600 - 700 Kg CO2/m2 for a
new building with full demolition of an existing building.

The new building structure is a bespoke addition to the existing
building, with minimum demolition to stitch the extension to
double its size. The slab extensions were designed
as composite steel frames with a high strength-to-weight ratio
to reduce gravity-induced overturning forces, hence reducing the
embodied emissions of the new structure.
Structural frames and materials were chosen to efficiently
conserve and maximise the reuse of the existing building with
minimum retrofit and strengthening.
The Reference Project was defined as a new building with the
reused concrete elements assuming new construction with the
concrete strength and volume reflecting the existing structure
and modern emissions factors.
The focus on upfront carbon provided for a safer planning
approval pathway by retaining a substantial part of the existing
frame and retaining the over-shadowing footprint in the botanic
gardens to build within. Cost benefits also resulted. Apart from
the savings on new build material costs, more than 12 months
of construction time was saved in avoiding demolition of
existing structure and parallel construction of new structure.

A practical guide to upfront carbon reductions

To re-use and leverage a 46 year old tower
structure to double the size of the original building
and save over 12,000 tonnes of embedded carbon,
has produced an extraordinary outcome in terms
of environmental sustainability, planning and
commercial benefit to our investors.
MURRAY MIDDLETON | Head of Development, Real Estate at AMP Capital

41

A practical guide to upfront carbon reductions

42

What’s next?

Upfront carbon is one of the critical challenges of our time. As
the market matures, benchmarks are refined, and low carbon
materials and processes enter the market, this guide will
continue to be updated.

Where can I
get more
information?

The following organisations are working to drive reductions in upfront
carbon emissions in Australia.

Green Building Council of Australia (GBCA), which represents
600+ members, including individual companies with a collective
annual turnover of more than $46 billion. The GBCA has defined a
Climate Positive Pathway for buildings and collaborates with
industry to drive whole life carbon reductions and net zero
outcomes through Green Star and the ‘Interim upfront carbon
modelling guide’.
NABERS, is a national initiative that provides distinct ratings from
one to six stars for buildings across energy, water, waste and
indoor environment. In 2021, in partnership with GBCA, NABERS
announced the development of a benchmark for embodied
carbon. NABERS is managed by the NSW Department of Planning,
Industry and Environment on behalf of the Federal, State and
Territory governments of Australia.
World Green Building Council (WorldGBC), the largest localregional-global action network accelerating sustainability in the
built environment. The WorldGBC offers embodied carbon
resources and primers to assist in driving reductions.
Australian Institute of Architects (AIA), established a Climate
Action Sustainability Taskforce (CAST),. This taskforce is
supporting the architectural profession in taking a decisive and
active stance about the twin crises of climate change and
biodiversity loss.
Clean Energy Finance Corporation (CEFC), a specialist investor at
the centre of efforts to help deliver on Australia’s ambitions for a
thriving, low emissions future. The CEFC collaborated with GBCA
and ISC to release a guide identifying opportunities to reduce
upfront carbon in buildings and infrastructure.
Climate Active, Climate Active is program by the Australian
Government to drive efforts in measuring, reducing, and offsetting
carbon emissions. It recently released a guideline for awarding a
climate active rating to new buildings that reduce and compensate
all upfront carbon emissions.

CRC for Low Carbon Living, Australia’s leading research and
innovation hub dedicated to driving the nation’s built environment
sector towards a globally competitive low carbon future. Offering
guides to low carbon commercial buildings – new build and
retrofit.

Materials and Embodied Carbon Leadership Alliance, The
Materials & Embodied Carbon Leaders’ Alliance (MECLA) is an
alliance that brings together the drive to reduce embodied carbon
in the building and construction industry, MECLA is determined to
transform the building and construction sector to reach Net-Zero
emissions.
Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors (RICS), a professional
body based in the UK with standards in the land, property and
construction sectors worldwide. RICS has developed the Whole
Life Carbon Assessment for the Built Environment 1st Edition
(November 2017). It provides a framework for assessing the
carbon emissions of a building over its lifecycle.

Information for
product
manufacturers

Information on product-level emissions can be found in the following.
These resources can also help product manufacturers on their
journey to understand and disclose their emissions.
Australian Life Cycle Assessment Society (ALCAS), delivered the
Australian National Life Cycle Inventory Database (AusLCI).
AusLCI is a national, publicly-accessible database for transparent
environmental information on a wide range of Australian products
and services over their entire life cycle.
Chartered Institution of Building Services Engineers (CIBSE), has
produced TM65 guide, Embodied carbon in building services: A
calculation methodology (2021), providing guidance on how to use
environmental product declarations (EPDs) to assess the
embodied carbon of building services equipment; and where not
available, it provides guidance on how to estimate embodied
carbon.
EC3 is an American free and easy-to-use database of digital, thirdparty verified Environmental Product Declarations (EPDs). EC3
includes EPDs for Australian and international products. It focuses
on the upfront supply chain emissions of construction materials.
EPD Australasia is a regional partner of the International EPD®
System with over 1,800 EPDs now published from businesses in
37 countries. EPD Australasia registers and publishes
Environmental Product Declarations (EPDs) and Climate
Declarations.
EPIC Database is a comprehensive and consistent open-access
Life Cycle Inventory of environmental flow coefficients for
construction materials. The database contains over 850
coefficients that can be incorporated into existing Life Cycle
Assessment workflows and processes. The Database was
developed by the University of Melbourne School of Design.

Engineers Australia (EA), collaborating with industry, EA is
defining practical solutions and driving innovative engineering to
transform systems, technologies and infrastructure.

A practical guide to upfront carbon reductions

43

A practical guide to upfront carbon reductions

44

Appendix A: Valuable terminology
Biogenic carbon
emissions

Biogenic carbon emissions originate from biological sources such as
trees and soil.

Carbon dioxide
equivalent

Carbon dioxide equivalent (CO2e) is a unit of measurement that is used
to standardise the climate effects of various greenhouse gases.

Carbon footprint

A carbon footprint is the total greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions caused
by an individual, event, organisation, service, place or product, expressed
as carbon dioxide equivalent (CO2e).

Carbon neutral

Climate neutrality refers to the concept of an individual or organisation
achieving a balance between the emissions of greenhouse gases and
the absorption of these gases by natural processes, resulting in net zero
emissions. This can be achieved by reducing carbon emissions, carbon
offsetting, or a combination of both. In Australia, carbon neutrality is
defined by the Australian Government through Climate Active.

Carbon sequestration Capturing and storing carbon dioxide from the atmosphere, for example
by establishing forests. The long-term effect of a forest as an
ecosystem will make a much larger impact than planting individual
trees. GBCA released “Climate Positive Buildings and our Net Zero
Ambitions” which provides more information on this topic.

Global Warming Potential
(GWP)

GWP is used in the life cycle assessment to quantify the climate
impact in GHG emissions of materials and products. It is useful in
defining performance targets or ranges in CO2e for materials and
products.

Global Warming Potential
Total (GWPT)

The sum of GWP from fossil fuels (GWPF), biogenic sources (GWPB)
and land use and land use change (GWPL) as defined in EN
15804:2012+A2:2019

Green finance

Loans and other financial products and services that encourage
industries and organisations to adopt sustainable practices, both
environmental and social.

Greenhouse gases

Gases that trap heat in the atmosphere.

ISO (International
Organisation for
Standardization)

An independent, non-governmental, international organisation that
develops standards to ensure quality, safety, and efficiency of
products, services, and systems.

Life cycle assessment
(LCA)

Measurement method that quantifies the environmental impacts of a
product, service, or organisation over its life cycle and value chain. It is
a science-based, whole-systems approach to understand and address
environmental issues.

Net zero emissions

Reducing direct (scope 1) and indirect emissions (scope 2) of a
business or organisation’s activities, and its value chain emissions
(scope 3) to zero or to a residual level that is consistent with a 1.5°Caligned pathway (see Paris Agreement). Residual emissions must
compensated for.

Cradle to cradle

Describes a material or product that is recycled into a new product at
the end of its life, so that ultimately there is no waste.

Cradle to gate

Describes a material or product from resource extraction to the factory
gate, before it is transported to the next step in the construction process
stage.

Cradle to grave

Describes a material or product from raw materials extracted and
processing, through each stage of manufacturing, transport, product
use, and ultimately, disposal.

Paris Agreement

A legally-binding international treaty on climate change adopted by
more than 190 countries in 2015. Its goal is to limit global warming to
well below 2°C, preferably to 1.5°C, compared to pre-industrial levels.

Embodied carbon

Emissions associated with building construction, including those from
extraction, transport, manufacture and install of materials and products,
as well as the use and end-of-life emissions associated.

Emissions scope

Scope 1 emissions are direct emissions that occur from sources that
are controlled or owned by an organisation. Scope 2 emissions are
indirect emissions associated with buying electricity or thermal
energy. Scope 3 includes all other emissions that occur in a
company’s value chain.

Taskforce for Climaterelated Financial
Disclosures (TCFD)

An international organisation created in 2015 to develop consistent
climate-related financial risk disclosures for use by companies, banks,
and investors in providing information to stakeholders.

Triple bottom line

Evaluation of a business, organisation or investment across social,
environmental and financial performance. This economic analysis
method considers direct and indirect benefits of decisions and
investments.

Value chain

A business model that describes the full range of activities needed to
create a product or service.

A certified public summary of a product’s environmental impact over its
Environmental
product declaration life cycle. Based on international standards and independently verified, it
is widely recognised by industry and governments.
(EPD)

Environmental,
Social and
Governance (ESG)

A set of standards for measuring a business’ or organisation’s
sustainability and ethical impact. ESG criteria are increasingly popular
as a way for consumers and investors to evaluate companies they want
to engage with.

Gate to practice
completion

A term used in life cycle assessments to describe a material or product
being transported from the factory gate to the construction site and
being installed through the building’s construction.

A practical guide to upfront carbon reductions

45

A practical guide to upfront carbon reductions

46

Appendix B:
Carbon in
materials

The high emitting elements in a building are the superstructure,
substructure and envelope, due to the carbon intensive materials used.
Figure 2 highlights the main building elements and the common materials
that are used. A higher variety of materials are used in services and
finishes however both elements have less information readily available.

CONCRETE
Traditional concrete often contains Portland Cement which is the
greatest contributor to its carbon emissions. Portland cement can be
replaced by supplementary cementitious materials (SCMs):
Fly ash, a coal combustion product. This is a good alternative
however as coal power generation decreases, so will availability.
Ground granulated blast furnace slag (GGBS or GGBFS) is obtained
by quenching molten iron slag (a by-product of iron and steelmaking) from a blast furnace in water or steam. GGBFS production
is also decreasing as the industry moves towards electric arc
furnaces.

Finishes

Services
Envelope
(Glass and
aluminium)
Superstructure
and Substructure
(Concrete, steel
and/or timber)

How to reduce the upfront carbon in concrete?

1.

Define the correct strength and performance – When comparing
design options, consider reduced concrete strength. To support
Portland Cement reduction, engage with concrete suppliers to
evaluate their standard mix options against performance
requirements.

2.

Specify low carbon concrete – Low carbon concrete mixes are vital
to most reduction pathways. All specifications should require the
builder to submit EPDs for all components. Specifications should
also call for the builder to submit a BOQ that provides the projected
concrete volumes, recycled content and GWP itemised by
application and type.

3.

Reduce and eliminate excess orders on site. This can be achieved
through careful measurement of structure (or formwork) to
minimise wastage.

4.

Deliver the specified grade and no higher. Concrete strengths have
diverse applications and costs; using higher strength concrete for
low-grade applications compromises material efficiency and raises
the carbon intensity of the project.

Figure 2: Typical materiality of building elements

STEEL
Traditional Steel is produced in a blast furnace using coke and is a major
contributor to upfront carbon. Recycled steel is now often processed
within an Electric Arc Furnace (EAF) but this makes up a small percentage
of total steel used in the built environment. When specifying steel,
consider:
Sourcing steel from ResponsibleSteel certified sites or at least from
ResponsibleSteel members or members of similar schemes.

Action:
Specify alternative binders and admixture.
Put demand side pressure on suppliers to capture and sequester
emissions from productions.

Specifying high strength steel – this may enable reductions in the
quantity of steel and the project’s upfront carbon.
Focusing on incorporating re-used members.
Where relevant, specifying steel produced using low carbon emissionsintensive processes or renewable energy.

A practical guide to upfront carbon reductions

47

A practical guide to upfront carbon reductions

48

TIMBER

ALUMINIUM
Timber buildings offer a range of advantages. Not only is it a bio-based
carbon sequestering material, but they offer benefits of increased onsite safety and potentially shorter construction time. Building
occupants benefit from improved air quality, reduced stress levels due
to timber’s biophilic attributes, and improved thermal performance.

Per kilogram of material, aluminium is a major contributor to upfront
carbon. This is primarily due to the large amount of electricity used
during the smelting process.
How do you reduce the upfront carbon in aluminium?
Two main types of low carbon aluminium products exist that reduce
emissions in the smelting phase:

Unlike most steel or concrete, timber has substantially lower levels of
upfront carbon associated with the manufacturing process.

Aluminium produced with renewable electricity

How do you account for the biogenic benefits of timber?

Aluminium produced with a high recycled content (~75%)

As a bio-based material, timber can remove CO2 from the atmosphere
and store it. This is called carbon sequestration. Engage with LCA
practitioners and evaluate related guidance to correctly account for
this in your project.

Early engagement with suppliers to explore low carbon solutions that
exist in their supply chain is key.
Action:

Specifying timber:
Source timber from sustainably managed forests. The Programme
for the Endorsement of Forest Certification (PEFC) and The Forest
Stewardship Council (FSC) are both international, non-profit, nongovernmental organisations that promote sustainable forest
management. While these schemes may prevent illegal timber
from being used in a project, it would be prudent for project teams
to do their own due diligence.
Explore opportunities with local structural timber suppliers
wherever possible to reduce transportation impacts
Design for deconstruction to maximise reuse

Adopt a circular economy approach to façade systems (where
aluminium is most often found in buildings) with refurbishment and
reuse, or renting façade modules from suppliers as part of a materials
bank.

GLASS

Design for transportation to reduce the need for complex structural
connections

Glass is a heavy carbon contributor for the envelope. Similar to
aluminium, it also requires a high input of industrial heat in its
manufacture.

Design for efficient grid, loading and dematerialisation

How do you reduce upfront carbon in glass?

How should you use timber?

Utilise timber as the primary construction material where possible
Fully reuse timber products and limit requirement for raw materials
where possible
For low to mid-rise:
Grid size – optimise to provide the most efficient span
distances and loading distributions
Floor type – optimise thickness of the flooring to reduce
material use
Fire rating and weather proofing – determine whether
additional materials are required to ensure the timber
structure meets these requirements

In the Australian market, low carbon glass options are still emerging.
However, European technology is developing solutions for the industry.
In the short term, plans to incorporate glass with a 40% recycled
content are being pursued. Long term solutions include electrifying
manufacturing equipment and switching energy sources to renewable
electricity and green hydrogen.
Action:
Procure glass manufactured using renewable electricity and green
hydrogen
Specify high recycled content
Adopt a circular economy approach to façade systems with
refurbishment and reuse, or renting façade modules from suppliers
as part of a materials bank

For high-rise: whole mass timber is not been seen as a practical
alternative at this stage. Hybrid-timber construction systems that
combine timber with different materials (e.g., steel and concrete)
and Cross Laminated Timber can deliver a wide range of structural
solutions. This should be weighed up with options for
deconstruction and reuse or recycling at end of use.

A practical guide to upfront carbon reductions

49

A practical guide to upfront carbon reductions

50

FINISHES

BUILDING SERVICES
Finishes make up a smaller portion of upfront carbon; however
they are the most often replaced through the building life-cycle and
make up a large portion of module B4. Finishes provide a good
opportunity for upfront carbon reductions with a wide range of
product choices compared with other building elements.
Emissions are likely to be driven by two key aspects:
Presence of high embodied carbon materials
Volume of the finishes product (e.g. high volume products such
as decorative ceilings and carpets are likely to contribute a
greater portion of upfront carbon)
How do you reduce the upfront carbon in finishes?

Any decision made to reduce upfront carbon needs to ensure that
the operational energy performance is not impacted. The diversity
of materials in building services, as well as the complexity of its
supply chain, means that engagement with suppliers should be
early to ensure building services equipment is both operationally
efficient and low carbon.
Approximately half of the upfront carbon of mechanical and fire
protection services can be attributed to steel. For electrical
services, polyvinyl chloride (PVC) (~40%) and aluminium (~30%)
make up the main portion. Hydraulic services are dominated by
copper and polyethylene (each contributing ~35-40%).
How do you reduce the upfront carbon in building services?

It is recommended that the following principles are applied:
1.

Where options exist, use less applied finishes or utilise the raw
finish of the envelope or structure

2.

Undertake an integrated fitout to minimise waste material

3.

Ask suppliers for EPDs to make like for like comparisons
between different products

4.

Consider the longevity of the finish when specifying

5.

Specify products with a high recycled content

6.

Identify and preference suppliers that are using renewable
energy sources in the manufacture of their products

7.

Identify and preference suppliers with product stewardship or
take back schemes. This acts to extend the life of products
and keeps materials in use at a higher value for a longer time.

Low carbon alternatives will generally rely on technologies and
processes such as electric arc furnace produced steel, and high
recycled content in aluminium and PVC. When and where the
majority of the emissions occur (e.g., at a steel mill or aluminium
smelter) are often not in the direct control of suppliers but sit
further back in the supply chain. Because of this, it may be more
efficient to signal demand and collaborate with suppliers. These
changes will take time, so we need to start this conversation now.

The building services industry is relatively new to the upfront
carbon conversation as, historically, building services focused on
operational efficiency. However, as more buildings are electrified
and the structure of buildings is decarbonised, the upfront carbon
of building services will become increasingly important.
Action:
Compare and specify building services products based on
product-specific EPDs

Action:
Reduce the use of finishes where possible.

Preference suppliers that are working within their own supply
chain to drive low carbon materials and increase recycled
content

Specify products made by renewable energy and with suppliers
that offer product stewardship schemes.

Specify low GWP or natural refrigerant plant and equipment
only
Embed sensors in components that retain as-built data and
support resource-rich material banks

A practical guide to upfront carbon reductions

51

A practical guide to upfront carbon reductions

52

Appendix C:
Environmental
Product
Declarations

ENVIRONMENTAL PRODUCT DECLARATIONS

How do you compare EPDs?

To measure the embodied carbon of a material or product, the
standard reporting mechanism is an Environmental Product
Declaration (EPD). An EPD is a report that describes a material or
product’s environmental impact. It is analogous to a nutrition label,
reporting a variety of health information. In this case, one of the
important tracked “nutrients” is the product’s GWP. EPDs are governed
by industry-established Product Category Rules (PCRs) that document
the reporting requirements and guidelines for a specific material or
product type. They are typically updated every five years following a
series of ISO standards. EPDs are commissioned by manufacturers or
vendors to report their environmental impacts. The most credible EPDs
are third-party verified, with a number of organisations providing this
service to the industry. For vendors that have not yet created EPDs for
their products, several trade organisations have created industryaverage EPDs based on the average national data for those materials.

Currently, EPD comparisons are not straightforward between different
materials and products (e.g., concrete to steel to timber) because EPDs
for specific materials are governed by different PCRs. While PCRs
primarily focus on the product life cycle stage, they each make different
assumptions, and in turn make it difficult to compare the data.

EPDs of the same material or product, however, are generally
comparable when following the same PCR. It is these “apples-to-apples”
conditions that result in the most accurate comparison of carbon
emissions.
Overall, while inconsistency and uncertainty exist with EPD data, it is the
most accurate information available for measuring carbon emissions of
materials and products. This data will be refined and improved over
time with industry adoption.

What is the best source of EPDs in Australia?
The GBCA recognises EPDs that are compliant with EN15804,
EPD Australasia and the International EPD system.

Types of EPDs

PCR is
third-party
reviewed?

Product-Specific
Declaration

—

EPD is
third-party
reviewed

Specific to a single
product from a
single supplier?

—

Product-Specific
Type III
PREFERRED

Industry-Wide

—

Standards
followed?

•

ISO 14044

•

ISO 14025

•

ISO 14040

•

ISO 14044

•

ISO 21930 / EN 15804

•

ISO 14025

•

ISO 14040

•

ISO 14044

•

ISO 21930 / EN 15804

A practical guide to upfront carbon reductions

53

A practical guide to upfront carbon reductions

54

References:

All references reviewed May, 2023

15. Zero carbon buildings for Melbourne, City of Melbourne

1. Interim guide to upfront carbon, GBCA

16. New protocol binds Net-Zero Asset Owner Alliance to halve portfolio
emissions by 2030, UNEP FI

2. A Climate Positive Roadmap for Buildings, GBCA

17. Guidance on metrics, targets, and transition plans, TCFD

3. Practical Guides on Electrification, GBCA
18. Australian buildings and infrastructure: Opportunities for reducing
embodied carbon, CEFC

4. Climate Positive Buildings and our Net Zero Future¸ GBCA
5. EN 15978: Sustainability of construction works - Assessment of
environmental performance of buildings - Calculation method, British
Standards Institution

19. Guideline: Upfront carbon for buildings, Climate Active

6. Upfront carbon benchmarks, Slattery

21. Typical operational energy and carbon figures for buildings, The
Institution of Structural engineers (ISTRUCTE)

7. 2020 Global Status Report for Buildings and Construction,
GlobalABC

20. Carbon Neutral and Nature Positive, The GPT Group

22. 2017 Embodied Carbon Benchmark Study, Carbon Leadership Forum
(CLF)

8. Embodied Carbon and Embodied Energy in Australia’s Buildings,
GBCA & thinkstep-ANZ

23. Carbon Insights Platform, Arup

9. Sustainable Buildings SEPP, NSW Government

24. Taking action on embodied carbon, Built

10. NABERS Embodied Emissions Initiative, NABERS

25. Transitioning Australia to a fossil fuel free construction future,
Lendlease

11. Bringing Embodied Carbon Upfront, WorldGBC
12. Decarbonizing construction: Guidance for investors and developers
to reduce embodied carbon, World Business Council of Sustainable
Development
13. ISSB unanimously confirms Scope 3 GHG emissions disclosure
requirements with strong application support, among key decisions,
International Financial Reporting Standards Foundation

26. Stepping Up the Pace: Fossil Fuel Free Construction outlines a
roadmap for removing fossil fuels from construction sites,
Lendlease and University of Queensland
27. Green Star Buildings, GBCA
28. SR15 - Global Warming of 1.5°C, IPCC
29. Corporate net zero standard, Science Based Targets Initiative (SBTI)

14. Net Zero by 2050: A roadmap for the energy sector, International
Energy Agency

A practical guide to upfront carbon reductions

30. Whole Life Carbon Assessment for the Built Environment, RICS

55

A practical guide to upfront carbon reductions

56

Acknowledgements
Delivery team
Jorge Chapa – Chief Impact Officer
Katherine Featherstone – Senior Manager Responsible Products
Emily Chung – Technical Services Lead

Jeremy Mansfield
Jacqui Bonnitcha

Proudly funded by the NSW Government

Proudly funded by Sustainability Victoria

James von Dinklage
With thanks to Alan Davis and Sean Devine for their
contributions as part of the Mott MacDonald team

GBCA would like to
acknowledge and thank
the following
organisations for their
contribution to the
delivery of this guide.

Built
Frasers Property
Dexus
Stockland
GPT
Bluescope Steel

GBCA would like to
thank our Climate
Positive Partners for
their ongoing support.

A practical guide to upfront carbon reductions

57

A practical guide to upfront carbon reductions

